The Project Gutenberg EBook of Correspondence of the Family of Haddock
1657-1719, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Correspondence of the Family of Haddock 1657-1719
       The Camden Miscellany: Volume the Eighth

Author: Various

Editor: Edward Maunde Thompson

Release Date: September 25, 2016 [EBook #53144]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRESPONDENCE--FAMILY HADDOCK ***




Produced by Cindy Horton and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber’s Note: inconsistencies in spelling, etc are left unaltered.





                        THE CAMDEN MISCELLANY,
                          VOLUME THE EIGHTH:

                              containing

          FOUR LETTERS OF LORD WENTWORTH, AFTERWARDS EARL OF
              STRAFFORD, WITH A POEM ON HIS ILLNESS.

          MEMOIR BY MADAME DE MOTTEVILLE ON THE LIFE OF HENRIETTA
              MARIA.

          PAPERS RELATING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF LORD SAVILE,
              1642-1646.

          A SECRET NEGOCIATION WITH CHARLES THE FIRST, 1643-1644.

          A LETTER FROM THE EARL OF MANCHESTER ON THE CONDUCT
          OF CROMWELL.

          LETTERS ADDRESSED TO THE EARL OF LAUDERDALE.

          ORIGINAL LETTERS OF THE DUKE OF MONMOUTH.

          CORRESPONDENCE OF THE FAMILY OF HADDOCK 1657-1719.

          LETTERS OF RICHARD THOMPSON TO HENRY THOMPSON, OF
              ESCRICK, CO. YORK.

                            [Illustration]

                    PRINTED FOR THE CAMDEN SOCIETY.

                            M.DCCC.LXXXIII.

                             WESTMINSTER:
                     PRINTED BY NICHOLS AND SONS,
                        25, PARLIAMENT STREET.

                          [NEW SERIES XXXI.]




COUNCIL OF THE CAMDEN SOCIETY FOR THE YEAR 1882-3.


  _President_,
  THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF VERULAM, F.R.G.S.

  J. J. CARTWRIGHT, ESQ., M.A., _Treasurer_.
  WILLIAM CHAPPELL, ESQ., F.S.A.
  F. W. COSENS, ESQ., F.S.A.
  JAMES E. DOYLE, ESQ.
  REV. J. WOODFALL EBSWORTH, M.A., F.S.A.
  JAMES GAIRDNER, ESQ.
  SAMUEL RAWSON GARDINER, ESQ., _Director_.
  J. W. HALES, ESQ., M.A.
  ALFRED KINGSTON, ESQ., _Secretary_.
  CHARLES A. J. MASON, ESQ.
  THE EARL OF POWIS, LL.D.
  EVELYN PHILIP SHIRLEY, ESQ., M.A. (_the late_)
  REV. W. SPARROW SIMPSON, D.D., F.S.A.
  WILLIAM JOHN THOMS, ESQ., F.S.A.
  J. R. DANIELL-TYSSEN, ESQ., F.S.A. (_the late_).

The COUNCIL of the CAMDEN SOCIETY desire it to be understood that they
are not answerable for any opinions or observations that may appear
in the Society’s publications; the Editors of the several Works being
alone responsible for the same.




                            CORRESPONDENCE
                                  OF
                         THE FAMILY OF HADDOCK
                               1657-1719

                               EDITED BY
                        EDWARD MAUNDE THOMPSON

                    PRINTED FOR THE CAMDEN SOCIETY
                             M.DCCC.LXXXI.




PREFACE.


Settled from remote times in the little town of Leigh, in Essex, at the
mouth of the Thames, the family of Haddock, we may be sure, took early
to the sea, as was befitting their name. There are traces of Haddocks
of Leigh to be found as far back as Edward the Third’s days; but we
need not search for earlier generations than those which sprang from
Richard Haddock, a captain in the Parliamentary Navy. That the family
had followed the sea from father to son in bygone times, and had so
established a tradition to be observed by their descendants, might be
argued from the regularity with which the Haddocks of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries served in the Navy for upwards of a hundred
years. This regularity is only to be equalled by that with which they
named their children Richard, to the perpetual confusion of their
biographers.

Captain Richard Haddock, to whom reference has been made above, served
under the Commonwealth. In 1642 we find him in command of the ship
Victory, and in 1652 he received a reward of £40 for good service.
He died in 1660 at the age of 79. His eldest son William, also a
Parliamentary captain, commanded the ship America in 1650, and the
Hannibal in 1653. He survived his father only seven years, dying in
1667, aged 60. Captain Richard Haddock had another son, Richard, who
was probably a good deal younger than his brother. He served with
distinction in the Dutch war in 1673;[1] and was in all probability the
father of William Haddock whom the family papers show to have been a
lieutenant in the Cornwall in 1696-1697, and who commanded a ship in
the action off Cape Passaro in 1718 (p. 54) and died in 1726.

William Haddock, the Parliamentary captain, had at least four
sons: Richard, Andrew, Joseph, and William. Richard will be
noticed presently. Andrew is mentioned in the first letter of this
Correspondence. William was at sea with his brother Richard in 1657
and 1658. Joseph was a lieutenant in the Lion in 1672, and in the
Royal Charles in 1673, and served in the Dutch war in those years;
and afterwards held a command in the East Indies, whence he wrote an
interesting letter here printed (p. 37). Richard Haddock was born about
the year 1629, and must have entered the service at an early age;
for in 1657, when the present Correspondence begins, he was already
a captain in command of the Dragon frigate, which formed part of the
squadron cruising off Dunkirk. In 1666 he was captain of the Portland;
but from 1667 to 1671 he appears to have temporarily left the Navy
and engaged in trading to the Mediterranean. On the breaking out of
the Dutch war, however, he was made captain of the Royal James, the
ship on which the ill-starred Earl of Sandwich hoisted his flag in
the battle of Southwold Bay. He was one of the few officers of that
vessel who survived the day, though he did not escape unwounded. He
next commanded the Lion; but early in 1673 he was appointed to the
Royal Charles, Prince Rupert’s ship, and within a few weeks followed
the Prince into the Royal Sovereign, when the bad qualities of the
former ship in action became evident. In July of the same year he was
made Commissioner of the Navy; and on the 3rd of July, 1675, he was
knighted. In 1682 he was appointed to the command of the Duke and to
the chief command of ships of war in the Thames and narrow seas; and
in the next year became First Commissioner of the Victualling Office.
After the Revolution he was named Comptroller of the Navy, which office
he continued to hold till his death, and received a pension of £500 a
year. He was one of the joint commanders-in-chief of the fleet in the
expedition to Ireland in 1690. He died on the 26th of January, 1715, in
his eighty-sixth year, and was buried in his native town of Leigh.

Sir Richard represented the borough of Shoreham in the parliament of
1685-1687. He was twice married, his first wife being named Lydia,
probably a member of the family of Stevens, which was settled at Leigh.
The maiden name of his second wife Elizabeth is unknown. He probably
married her not earlier than 1670, when she was about twenty years of
age, the inscription on her tomb recording her death in 1709, at the
age of 59.

Sir Richard appears to have had at the least six children, three sons
and three daughters. The sons were Richard, William, and Nicholas.
Of the daughters the name of only one, Elizabeth, has survived, who
married John Clarke, of Blake Hall in Bobbingworth, co. Essex. Another
daughter married a Lydell. The third daughter died unmarried. William,
apparently the second son, died young. Richard and Nicholas both
entered the Navy.

Richard, the eldest son, was, in 1692, fifth lieutenant of the Duchess,
and was present at the battle of La Hogue. He afterwards served in the
London, and in 1695 was in command of the Rye. At the beginning of
1702 he received his commission as captain of the Reserve, and in the
following year succeeded to the Swallow. In the latter ship he served
with Sir George Rooke in the Mediterranean. But in 1707 he had the
misfortune to be surprised by the French when convoying the Archangel
merchant fleet and to lose fifteen ships; and, although appointed to
the Resolution early in the following year, he seems to have soon
retired from active service. In 1734, however, he re-appears as
Comptroller of the Navy, and held the post for fifteen years, dying at
an advanced age in 1751. From the entries in Leigh parish registers it
seems that he was married thrice and had issue, none of whom, however,
survived him many years.

Of Nicholas, the youngest son of Sir Richard Haddock, we first catch
sight in the following pages (p. 43) as distinguishing himself at Vigo
in 1702, and serving in Spain in 1706. In the following year, on the
7th April, he received the command of the new ship Ludlow Castle, being
not yet twenty years old. At the battle of Cape Passaro he fought his
ship, the Grafton, with great gallantry; and indeed at all times proved
himself a very skilful and dashing officer. He rose eventually to the
rank of Admiral of the Blue, and commanded the squadron sent into the
Mediterranean to overawe the Spaniards in 1738-1741. He returned to
England invalided and did not long survive, dying in 1746, aged 60.

About the year 1723 he purchased Wrotham Place, in Kent, where he
occasionally lived. He left three sons: Nicholas, Richard, and Charles.
The first died in 1781; Richard served in the Navy; Charles was still
living at Wrotham in 1792.

Here the male line of the Haddocks fails; and it is not necessary to
follow the family history further. A pedigree, which may be found
useful, is appended.[2]

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be seen that the letters and papers here printed belonged, for
the most part, to Sir Richard Haddock. His long life enabled him to
embrace four adult generations in his correspondence. The collection
of documents from which they have been selected was purchased by the
Trustees of the British Museum in 1879, and now forms the Egerton MSS.
2520-2532.

It is to be regretted that the Correspondence is so comparatively
scanty, for no doubt at one time the collection was a good deal larger.
From Nichols’s _Literary Anecdotes_ (vol. v. p. 376) we know that the
Haddock papers were placed in the hands of Captain William Locker,
the Lieutenant-Governor of Greenwich Hospital, who contemplated a
publication of naval biography which was carried out by Charnock in his
_Biographia Navalis_ from the same materials. There is also evidence
among the papers themselves, in the form of a letter written by Charles
Haddock in 1792, to show that they were placed in Locker’s hands. The
fate of borrowed books and papers is a mournful one.

But, few as they are, a selection from the Haddock Papers has been
thought worthy to appear in print. As specimens of the letter-writing
of a seafaring family of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
the letters have a value of their own, even apart from the personal
interest which they inspire as the record of long and honourable
service.

                                                           E. M. T.

    _24 March, 1881._

          Richard Haddock,
  Captain in the Parliamentary Navy, = ...
     d. 22 May, 1660, æt. 79.        |
                                     |
            +-----------------------+-----------------------+
            |                                               |
  Anna ..., = William Haddock,             Richard Haddock, = ...
  d. 6 Jan. | Captain in the                      R.N.      |
  1688,     | Parliamentary Navy,                           |
  æt. 78.   | d. 22 Sept. 1667, æt. 60.                     |
            |                                       [William Haddock,
            |                                         Captain R.N.,
            |                                          d. 1726.]
            |
            +---+----------------------+---------------+--------+
                |                      |               |        |
  1. Lydia      = Sir Richard     Joseph Haddock,  William   Andrew
     [Stevens]. | Haddock,        R.N., and East   Haddock,  Haddock.
  2. Elizabeth  | Admiral, R.N.,  Indian Service.    R.N.
     ..., d. 26 | d. 26 Jan.
     Feb. 1709, | 1715, æt. 85.
     æt. 59.    |
                +---+--------------+--------+------+-----+----+
                    |              |        |      |     |    |
                    |      William Haddock, |   A dau.   | A daughter,
                    |           d. 1697.    |   m. ...   | unmarried,
                    |                       |   Lydell.  | d. 24 Mar.
  1. Martha ... d.  = Richard               |      |     | 1732.
     1722.          | Haddock, R.N.,        |   A son.   |
  2. Elizabeth ...  | Comptroller           |            |
     d. 1730.       | of the Navy,          |            |
  3. Mary, daughter | d. 1751               |      Elizabeth = John Clarke,
     of Charles     |                       |      Haddock.  | of Blake
     Compton, 4th   |                       |                | Hall, in
     son of George  |                       |                | Bobbingworth
     4th Earl of    |                       |      +---------+-------+
     Northampton.   |                       |      |         |       |
                    |                       |  Richard   Elizabeth  Fanny
                    |                       |  Clarke.   Clarke.    Clarke.
                    |                       |
  +-----------------+     Nicholas Haddock, = Frances ...
  |                       Admiral, R.N., d. | d. 22 Nov.
  |                  26 Sept. 1746, æt. 60. | 1735.
  |                                         |
  |     +---------+----------+--------+-----+---+
  |     |         |          |        |         |
  |  Richard   Fleetwood  Nicholas  Richard   Charles
  |  Haddock,  Haddock,   Haddock,  Haddock,  Haddock,
  |  d. 1717.  d. 1722.   d. 1781.   R.N.     living in 1792.
  |
  +----+----------+------------+------------------+
       |          |            |                  |
     Martha    Richard     Elizabeth = ...      Mary, = George Calvert,
     Haddock,  Haddock,    Haddock,    Harman.   d.     Lieutenant in
     d. 1722.  d. 1756.    d. 1754.             1818.   the Guards,
                                                        d. 1781.

[1] See p. 19 in the Correspondence. Charnock in his _Biographia
Navalis_, i. 334, has made him out to be the son of Andrew Haddock, his
own nephew.

[2] The best account of the Haddock family is to be found in a paper
written by Mr. H. W. King and printed in _The Archæological Mine_, a
work relating to Kentish history by A. J. Dunkin, vol. ii., pp. 41-51.
Charnock’s _Biographia Navalis_ of course gives particulars of the
services of the family; and a number of original naval commissions of
its different members are still extant in Egerton MS. 2520. See also
_The History of Rochford Hundred_ by Philip Benton, 1872, pp. 35 _sqq._




CORRESPONDENCE OF THE FAMILY OF HADDOCK.


CAPTAIN RICHARD HADDOCK[a] TO HIS FATHER.

                   Dragon frigᵗ in the Downes, this 30ᵗʰ May, aᵒ 1657.

HONᵈ FATHER,

Sir, these I hope will congratulate yoʳ safe arrivall at Leghorne, wᶜʰ
God graunt may be with yoʳ health and well fare, for the continuation
whereof I shall ever pray.

I cannot yet forgett my unhapynes yᵗ soe short a tyme and small
distance hindred me the inioymᵗ of seeing yoᵘ before you gote out yᵉ
Channell, seeing I made it my aime and bussines to performe it, but
pleased God to frustrate me of my intended hapynes. I hope yᵗ our next
interview may be with the greater ioy and comfort. Indeed, when I
returned to Dover, which was the Sonday following yoʳ departure, I was
not a little greived when Major Genˡˡ Kelsey[b] tould me yᵉ unwellcome
news of yoʳ being past by; and himselfe was very sory when I gave him
an accᵗ yᵗ I mett yoᵘ not, and tould me, if I had in yᵉ least desired
not to have gone for Zeinhead, he would have ordered an other ship in
oʳ roome. I was very thankfull for his respect he exprest towards yoᵘ,
but I knew not before yᵗ I might be soe bould wᵗʰ him as to desire such
a favor. Yoᵘ saild hence yᵉ Fryday evening; and Satuarday, by 10 in yᵉ
forenoone, we were soe neare yᵉ head of Beachy yᵗ noe shipp could or
did passe by us, but we spake wᵗʰ in hopes of meeting yoᵘ. Surely the
wind blew the harder to deny me yᵗ hapynes. God in mercy goe alongst
with yoᵘ and preserve yoᵘ from the rage of unreasonable men. I shall
not be wanting, as I am bound in duty, to make it my earnest request to
God for yoʳ preservation. My wife, in good health, presents her humble
duty to yoᵘ, and hath ever since bine very sorrowfull she stayed not
behind to present her duty and respects to yoᵘ at yoʳ departure.

Sir, litle of novelty ofers at present, only of great preparations for
yᵉ fitting out seavrall great shipps, as yᵉ Resolution, Naiesby, and
Andrew, from Portsmᵒ; yᵉ Tryomph, Victory, Vantguard, and Entrance,
from Chatham. I cannot give you an accᵗ, yᵉ occasion or upon wᵗ designe
yᵉ shipps are prepared; only suppose it may be to be in a readynes
to defend our selves if any treachorus act should be ofered by the
Hollander, who will have 70 saile men of warr out very sodainely, as
is certainely reported. I hope noe act of hostillity against us is
intended. We have iust cause to feare yᵉ worst; and I think, as farr as
I am able to aprehend, yoᵘ will have little occasion to trust or put
any confidence in them abroad. God send us peace at home and abroad;
but, if these faile us, peace wᵗʰ God will beare up our spirits in the
greatest dificulties yᵗ doe atend our earthly pilgrimage.

Sir, my wife desires yoᵘ please, at yoʳ arrivall at Venᵃ, to buy for
her a foiled stone of the measure I conseave was given by her sisters
to Brother Andrew at Leigh; as alsoe a pott ketle and 2 stue panns, one
lesser than the other; as alsoe a jarr from Leghorne, with wᵗ other
things nessesary for a howse, to yᵉ value of £3 in fower pound in all,
which shall be thankfully repayed. I intend to wright yoᵘ to Venᵃ,
when [I] conseave you may ataine thither, and what ofers shall not be
wanting of advizeing yoᵘ.

My Lord Protector hath denyed yᵉ governmᵗ of the Comonwealth under yᵉ
title of King,[c] and since, its established to him in the title he now
beares.[d]

I have not heard from home since yoʳ departure. My intire love with
my wives remembred to our 3 brothers wᵗʰ all oʳ freinds on bord yoᵘ.
Brother Wm., in health, presᵗˢ his humble duty to yoᵘ, wᵗʰ his love
to his Broʳ. My saluts to Mr. Holder; and, with my most humble duty
presented to yoʳ self, I remayne,

Sir, yoʳ ever lo. and obedient sonne till death,

                                                   RICHARD HADDOCK.

My wife being present desires, wᵗʰ yᵉ presenting her humble duty to
yoᵘ, to subscribe herselfe yoʳ lo. daughter till death,

                                                 LYDIA HADDOCKE.[e]

Since yᵉ wrighting yᵉ above lynes I have recᵈ order to goe over and
ryde before Dunkerk, and to take yᵉ comand of yᵗ squadron now riding
there. This day is arrived hapy news, Genˡˡ Blake’s burneing and
sinking 16 saile of the K. of Spaine’s gallions and shipps at Sᵗᵃ
Cruse, most welcome and true.[f]

                                                              R. H.

    To his honᵈ. father, Capt. Wm. Haddock, Comander of the shipp
    Hanniball, these present, Livorno.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Afterwards Admiral Sir R. Haddock.

[b] Major-General Thomas Kelsey, commanding in Kent and Surrey.

[c] On the 8th May.

[d] On the 25th May.

[e] Richard Haddock’s first wife. Perhaps her maiden name was Stevens.
(See letter of 1 May 1658, in which Haddock sends his duty to “Father
and Mother Steevens.”)

[f] Blake’s last victory at Santa Cruz, in the Canaries, 20th April. He
died on his voyage home, in sight of land, on the 17th August.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                 Dragon frigᵗ in Dunkirk Road, this 15ᵗʰ June, aᵒ 1657.

HONᵈ FATHER,

Sʳ, my most humble duty wᵗʰ Bro. Wms. presented unto you wᵗʰ oʳ intire
loves to oʳ loveing brothers and freinds wᵗʰ you. These only serve to
advize yoᵘ of our wellfare, hopeing and earnestly praying to the Lord
that yᵉ like good health atends you yᵗ, blessed be God, we injoy.
These I hope will find yoᵘ safe arrived at Leghorne. My last from the
Downes gave yoᵘ an accᵗ yᵗ we were ordered over hither to take the
command of this squadron that now lyes wᵗʰ us before this place.[a]
Since oʳ arrivall heere, wᶜʰ is 14 dayes since, not anything of action
hath ofered worth yoʳ advice; the good we doe heere is only to keepe
there men of warr in yᵗ are in, and prevent those comeing in wᵗʰ there
prisses yᵗ are abroad. But they want not harbours in Holland to secure
them and wᵗ they ketch from us. I conseave yoᵘ want not letters of
caution from yoʳ owners to be carefull of trusting the Hollanders.
I feare they will prove treacherous to there ingagemᵗˢ wᵗʰ us in
the peace agreed betwixt us. They are almost ready to saile wᵗʰ 50
or upward men of warr, besides 16 saile now in or Channell. My Lord
Protector is not wanting to prevent there treacherous actions, if any
intended against us. I conseave in 14 dayes we may have upwards of 40
saile, considerable men of warr, in the Downes, to answer any atempt
may be ofered by them; and doe beleive both we and the squadron before
Ostend may be called of, as soone as we have any intelligence of there
redynes to saile.

All oʳ freinds in England, I heare, are in health. My wife still at
Deall, and stayes to accompᵃ Aunt Morgan to London; my unkle now
being in the Downes, and conseave may saile very sodainely, the wind
presenting faire at present. Sir, please at yoʳ arrival at Venᵃ to
present my service and respects to my Mr. and Mrs. Hobson, with Mr.
Jno. Hobson, junʳ, my saluts; as also to Mr. Jones and his wife.

Sir, I have not else at present worth yoʳ advice. With my earnest
prayers to Almighty God to preserve you out of the hands of yoʳ
mercyles enemyes, and send yoᵘ a safe returne to the injoymᵗ of yoʳ
relations, for the happy accomplishmᵗ whereof itt shall be the earnest
request of,

Sir, yoʳ most affetionate and obedient sonne till death,

                                                      RICHARD HADDOCK.

    To his honᵈ freind Capt. Wm. Haddock, Comander of the ship
    Hanniball, these present, at Livorno.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] By the treaty (23 Mar. 1657) with France against Spain, Cromwell
agreed to find 6000 men, with a sufficient fleet, to operate against
Gravelines, Mardike, and Dunkirk; the two latter towns, when reduced,
to be delivered to the English. Mardike was captured in September of
this year, and Dunkirk in June 1658; and both towns were duly handed
over to the English forces.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

          Dragon frigᵗ in Dunkirke Road, this 26 Aprill, 1658; Monday.

HONᵈ FATHER,

Sʳ, my most humble duty presented unto yoᵘ wᵗʰ my deare Mother,
Grandfather, and Grandmᵒ, wᵗʰ my loveing saluts to my wife, broˢ,
sisters, and freinds. My last, of 18 instant, I sent by my Broʳ Wm.,
whome I gave leave to goe to London; wᶜʰ hope is safely arrived with
you. Since wᶜʰ, litle of acction here in these parts. The 21 instant,
about midnight, heere escaped out a small pickeron of 4 or 6 guns
out this haboʳ, notwᵗʰstanding our vigilancy and indeavors for his
surprizall, haveing oʳ boates in wᵗʰ the shore and a small frigᵗ, who
gave him chase and fired seavrall guns at him; but the darknes of the
night prevented there long keepeing sight of him, and, notwᵗʰstanding
they made after him to the best of there understanding, yet he got
away and noe sight of him at day light. Last Saturday heere went from
Mardike Marshall d’Aumon, Duke of Bouligne,[a] wᵗʰ 13 hundred French
souldiers, imbarqued in seaverall vessells, and gone to Oastend, before
wᶜʰ place they arrived that night wᵗʰ the Vice Admirall.[b]

If the intelligence given me be true, we shall see a sodaine alteration
in Flaunders. Its said yᵗ, for a considerable summe of mony, the towne
of Ostend is to be delivered up to yᵉ King of Fraunce by the Governor
and inhabitants of sᵈ place, they being in such a sad condition by
reasone of the extreame burden yᵗ lyes upon them.

For security of performance there is a considerable man, who hath
confirmed the accord wᵗʰ the K. of Fraunce, now wᵗʰ Marshall d’Aumon,
that belongs to Ostend, who hath ingaged his life for performance. I
pray God they faile not in there undertakeings; and, although treachery
be hateful and odious throughout the world, yet doubtles ’twill prove
hapye for our poore traders when such a considerable place as yᵗ is, a
neast of roages, shall be routed. If it proves efectuall, farwell most
pᵗˢ of Flaunders this sumer.

Sʳ, please to keepe this intelligence to yoʳ selfe, least it should
come from me, being privately advized me. I hope, when our victualling
is out, we shall come over to tallow; wᶜʰ God graunt, that I may not
fayle of my earnest desire of seeing you before you goe forth. I
intend sodaynly to send to the Vice Admirall to know where we shall be
disposed by him or otherwise from the Comissʳˢ of Admiralty. Sʳ, I have
not other at present. Wᵗʰ my humble request to yᵉ Allmighty for yoʳ
preservation, I remayne

Yoʳ most loveing and obedient son till death,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

    To his honᵈ freind Capt. Wm. Haddock, at his howse nere the
    Newstaires in Wapping, these present, in London.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Antoine, Marshal d’Aumont, Governor of Boulogne. Negotiations
had been opened with traitors within Ostend; but the matter was kept
no secret, and the garrison was prepared. When therefore D’Aumont
attempted a surprise, the tables were turned; he was caught in a trap
and had to surrender.--Sismondi, _Hist. des Français_, vol. xxiv.
(1840), p. 564.

[b] Edward Montague, afterwards Earl of Sandwich, who had command of
the English fleet.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

        Dragon frigᵗ in Dunkirke Road, this primᵒ May, 1658; Satuarday.

HONᵈ FATHER,

Sʳ, my last from this place was of 26th past, since wᶜʰ not anything
hath ofered. The great Monsʳ with the soldiers I gave yoᵘ accᵗ of are
yet before Oastend with the Vice Admirall have efected nothing, not
haveing had opertunity, these out winds preventing there landing. God
sending us shore winds, we shall quicklie see the result of the action
in hand.

I sent to the Vice Admirall to desire he would order us into the river
to tallow and revictuall; but he wrights me, in regard he hath noe
ship with him to place in our roome, he will not wᵗʰout order from
the Admᵗʸ. Soe this day I have wrote to them, advizeing the neere
expiration of our victualling, also makeing it my humble request that
we may come to Chatham to tallow and revictuall; wᶜʰ I hope they will
graunt, but am dubious of my desired hapynesse of seeing yoᵘ before yoᵘ
goe forth. My humble duty presented to my deare Mother, Grandfather,
and Grandmᵒ, Father and Mother Steevens, wᵗʰ my loveing saluts to my
wife, brothers, sisters, and freinds in genˡˡ; and, wᵗʰ my most humble
duty to yᵒr selfe, wᵗʰ prayers to the Allmighty for yoʳ continued
preservation, I remaine,

Sʳ, your most loveing and dutyfull sonne till death,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

Being hast, yᵉ frigᵗ under saile with a lee tyde, my wife must excuse
my not wrighting her at present.




THE SAME TO SIR WILLIAM COVENTRY.[a]

  Portland frigᵗᵗ in Oasely Bay,[b] 11ᵗʰ Sept. 1666; Tuesday, 8 at night.

RIGHT HONᵇˡᵉ,

Yours of 8th instant, wᵗʰ his R. Highnesse order inclosed, I received
this afternoone; wᶜʰ shall put in execution to morrow morning, wind and
weather permiting. Sonday last, in compᵃ wᵗʰ the Adventure and a fire
ship, we sayled out of Oasely bay through the Slade Way,[c] intending
for the North Forland, and soe unto the Downes, in search of our
fleet. About noone we gote sight of the Forland, and within one hower
after we espied a fleet of shipps on the back of the Goodwin sand, wᶜʰ
we deemed to be our fleet; but, standing wᵗʰ them, we found them to be
the Dutch fleet, consisting of 70 in 75 sayle. Two ships of the fleet
makeing us bore downe wᵗʰ us, and presantly after two more followed
them. We stood away from them to the eastwards, towards a ship then to
leewards, wᶜʰ we suposed to be a Hollander, but proved a Sweed bound
for Burdaix Light; and, finding two of the men of warr spring there
luffs againe and only 2 bore downe wᵗʰ us, we clapt upon a wind and
stood towards them, haveing gote them about 5 or 6 miles to leewards
of yᵉ body of there fleet. But, when they came wᵗʰin neere shote of
us, they keept there wind, would not come neere to fight us, but kept
fireing guns to windwards and makeing a waft wᵗʰ there ensignes for
more assistance; whereupon 7 or 8 sayle more bore away wᵗʰ us. Night
comeing on, we thought it not convenient to lye by for them, but stood
away for our owne coast, not being able to keep our lower tire of
guns out to windwards, and but 32 brˡˡˢ powder on bord. Yesterday we
got into Alborough bay, when I gave accᵗ to the Comissʳ at Harwᶜʰ by
an expresse from Alborough of our proceedings, desireing him to send
the said letter to yoʳ Honʳ, if he thought it convenient. I have now
recᵈ from Harwᶜʰ an aditionall suply of sixty barills of powder. The
Adventure intends alongst wᵗʰ us. The Litle Mary, I understand, will
not be ready in 3 or 4 dayes. To conclud, Sonday night proved such a
hard galle of wind yᵗ I iudge the Dutch fleet either drove or bore
away towards there owne coast, for we saw them all under sayle before
twas dark. I shall not be wanting to give yoʳ Honʳ an accᵗ of our
proceedings, wᶜʰ is wᵗ ofers at present from,

Rᵗ Honᵇˡᵉ, yʳ humble servᵗ att Comᵈ,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

    _Endorsed_: “Copie of lettʳ to Sʳ Wm. Coventry, from Sʳ Rᵈ
    Haddock.”

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Sir William Coventry was at this time one of the Commissioners of
the Navy.

[b] Hollesley Bay, or Haven, on the Suffolk coast, between Orford Ness
and the River Deben.

[c] The channel leading south from Hollesley Bay.




DECLARATION OF CAPTAIN RICHARD HADDOCK.

Aᵒ 1657, Novembʳ.

                                          Dragon frigᵗ, Novembʳ, 1657.

18. The 18th November I recᵈ orders from Sʳ Richard Stainer[a] to sayle
out yᵉ Downes, and in company wᵗʰ the Colchester frigᵗᵗ to plye of of
Ostend.

26. The 26 day, Thursday, we sailed out yᵉ Downes, yᵉ wind at west. We
went out at yᵉ North Sand Head, twixt yᵉ Brake and Goodwin. This noone
we spake wᵗʰ the Pembrooke frigᵗᵗ, come from Harwich cleane tallowed;
N.E. from yᵉ north Forland, in 15 fadoms watter, we clapt by under a
maine course, intending to drive all night; but, upon sight of 6 sayle
of Holland men of warr, 3 wᵗʰ there flaggs abroad, to say Admˡˡ Vice
and Rear Admirall, we stood with them. Yᵉ Pembrooke haveing espied
them before us, though bound into yᵉ Downes, bore away on the back
of the Goodwin towards them; comeing up with them, first fired at yᵉ
Admˡˢ flagg, but was not struck. Upon wᶜʰ yᵉ Comandʳ of the Pembrooke
sent his boats on bord to know yᵉ reason of itt. Whilst they were in
dispute, we, comeing in shote, fired at yᵉ Admˡˡˢ flagg alsoe, and
presantly after they sent up a man to topmasthead and struck the flagg,
wᶜʰ his Vice and Reare Admˡˡ did the like. Then we bore under his lee
ahead of him, and hayld him and stood asterne, and, after, tackt and
came and lay on his weather quarters. There flaggs hang as a waft for
about ½ an hower, and afterwards furld them; the Admˡˡ fired a gun
to lewards, filld, and stood away to yᵉ eᵗwards. We answerd him with
another; lay by and drove all night. These men of warr came there from
yᵉ coast of Portugall, yᵉ Lᵈ Updam Admˡˡ, as I was informed by Sʳ
Richard Stayner at my returne into yᵉ Downes. This I can testifie upon
oath, if calld thereunto.

Given under my hand this primo January, 1671/2.

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Admiral Sir Richard Stayner was knighted for his gallantry in
Blake’s attack on Santa Cruz. (See above, p. 3.)




CAPTAIN RICHARD HADDOCK TO HIS WIFE.[a]

             On bord yᵉ R. James, at anchor 4 miles wᵗʰout St. Hellens,
                                      this 5ᵗʰ May, 1672; Sonday night.

MY DEARE BETTY,

This afternoone we arrived this place wᵗʰ our noble fleet. Wᵗʰin, at
Spitthead, we see yᵉ French fleet gote heere before us wilbe good
company. Tomorrow I doubt not but we shall joyne wᵗʰ them. A few daies
will prepare us to goe to seeke yᵉ Hollanders, who are out. We saw some
of there scouts that day we sailed out yᵉ river. I have no other news
to write thee at present.

I hope these will find yᵉ at London, where I advize thee to stay that
I may the more certainely direct my letters to thee. I shall not be
wanting to give the advice by all opertunities how itt fares with us.
God Almighty preserve and keepe the and us in good health, and in His
good tyme send us a ioyfull meeteing. My deere love to all myne and thy
loveing relations. Wᵗʰ intire saluts to thy selfe and my daughter,

I remayne thyne, whilst I am

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

My love to my deare Coz Goodlad at Wapping. Pray venture a letter or
two to Portsmᵒ to me.

  R. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] His second wife, Elizabeth; maiden name unknown.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                On bord the Royall James, this 14ᵗʰ May, 1672; Tuesday
                                   evening, at anchor neere Dungenesse.

MY DEAREST LOVE,

These are to give the an accᵗ of my wellfare and good health, wᶜʰ I
blesse God I doe injoy. We are now at anchor neere Dungenesse wᵗʰ our
whole fleet, consisting of 80 men of warr, English and French, about 20
or 22 fireships, and many small vessells besides. We have bine tydeing
it up from the Isle of Wind (_sic_). Ever since Wedensday last the
winds have hung easterly. The Dutch fleet, we heard yesterday, were
at yᵉ North Forland. We doe our utmost endeavor to get to them, if
they have a mind to fight us. To yᵉ westwards of yᵉ Downes they may
easely be wᵗʰ us; but we judge there designe is to ingage us amongst
the sands, wᶜʰ posibly they may be deceaved in there expectation. God
Almighty goe along wᵗʰ us and give us victory over our enemyes. I
know I shall not want thy prayers and the well wishes of all my deare
relations for my preservation. We have a brave fleet and, in the maine,
well mand. For our parts we doe not complayn, haveing neere 900 men on
bord us; yᵉ Duke 1000, I beleive, and upwards. It is probable, before
we ingage, we may have yᵉ ships in the river ioyne wᵗʰ us, wᶜʰ are 10
or 11 men of warr and 4 fire ships. I desire we may put our strength in
God Almighty; but soe noble a brave fleet have not bine seene together
in our dayes.

My deare, speake to my broʳ Joseph for the ballence of the mony I
desired him to recᵉ for me of Mr. Forth and Mr. Beare, and to pay out
of it severall debts wᶜʰ at present I doe not remember the perticulars.
I know not how to direct the to answer these, nor where you may send to
meet us. If this arrive yoᵘ on Thursday, you may venture a lyne or two
to Dover Road, where posibly we may stop 24 houres to watter, and next
I supose for Sowle Bay or the coast of Holland. Desire my Coz Goodlad,
the draper, to recᵉ three pounds for the of Cozen Boys, wᶜʰ is due
April last; and pray, when the bond is due of Mr. Welsted and Temple,
goe to them and recᵉ the interest £9, and desire them to lett me have
£100 or more, if posible, to suply my occasions. Thou knowest the
imploymᵗ I am in is very expencive, and therfore let me not faile of
haveing £100 at least of them. Twas Mr. Welsted’s promise in a month,
but I have stayd neere 10 weeks. Pray let me know wᵗ is done wᵗʰ the
mony in broʳ Hurleston’s hands and brother Thornburgh. I know they will
be very kind. I have heere inclosed sent the my will, wᶜʰ have made for
all good respects. I desire the to keepe it by the, sealed as it is.
If God Almighty in His providence should take me out this life, you
will find I have not failed of my promise to thee, though I have some
reason to lament the kindnes done me by thy freinds; but that shall
not trouble me at this tyme. God Almighty, I doubt not, will preserve
me, that I may live to see the againe wᵗʰ ioy and comfort. Pray lett
me know by some meanes or other of the receipt of these. My deare love
to my sister Jessen, broʳ and sister Thornburgh, broʳ Hurlestone. My
respects to my Unckle Moyer; all of them. My kind saluts to my dear Coz
Goodlad at Wapping. To all my loveing freinds comend me. My deare, I
have only to add my prayers to God for thy wellfare. Wᵗʰ my intire love
and saluts to thee and my daughter, I remaine

Thyne, till death us pᵗ,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

These I send to Dover by our kitch, who is goeing to watter for us, but
doe beleive we may get thither ourselves as soone.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                          R. James, neare Sowle Bay, this 21 May, 1672;
                                                       Tuesday evening.

MY DEARE BETTY,

The 18th instant, wᶜʰ was Satuarday last, I wrote the by one of the
yachts, and as thou advised. Yᵉ next day we saw the Dutch fleet. We
drew ours into a lyne of bataile, the French leading, we in the reare,
all prepared to fight, haveing stav’d and heft over bord all ours, and
I think all the cabins of the whole fleet. The Hollanders stood over
for yᵉ Flaunders Banks and yᵉ Weelings. About 7 at night we were up
wᵗʰ them in a lyne, as they lay in the same posture very orderly to
recᵉ us; but, finding it would have bine darke before we could have
well began with them, being about 4 or 5 miles to leewards of us, yᵉ
wind at W.S.W., we thought it not convenient to ingage them. Yᵉ night
following, upon there tacking of, we tackt in yᵉ reare, yᵉ whole fleet
following to keep them to leewards of us, as we did yᵗ night by our
twice tacking againe. Yesterday morning it proved a very thick fogge.
We wᵗʰ our division anchored, standing in wᵗʰ the Banks of Flaunders of
Oostend. About 10 in yᵉ morning, upon cleareing up, we wayed anchor, yᵉ
Dutch fleet 3 miles to leewards of us. We stood of and mett our fleet
standing in. Yᵉ Dutch stood of wᵗʰ us. This day it proved much wind,
that we could not fight them; whereupon we stood in to our shore N.W.,
and about ½ seas over we anchored all night. This morneing we saw yᵉ
fleet again. We stood of towards them, expecting they would have stood
wᵗʰ us; but they stood of intending to draw us over amongst those
shoulds, to fight them there. We keeping our wind, and they bearing
away, as we suposed, from yᵉ wind, we lost sight of them. It blowing
hard we tackt, and now come neare to Sowle Bay, where I supose we may
stay a day or two to watter our fleet.

This day came into us the Katherine, Princes, and Advice, wᵗʰ 2 fire
ships more; soe yᵗ I supose we are neerer 90 then fowerscore men of
warr, upwards 25 fireships, amongst wᶜʰ my unckle R. H. is come. The
Dutch fleet not soe many men of warr as we, I beleive, by 8 or 10
saile, many small vessells and fire ships. Had it pleased God yesterday
to have given us faire weather, God assisting, we had given a good accᵗ
of oʳ actions; our men briske and brave and very ready and willing to
fight. The Earle of Bristow[a] on bord wᵗʰ us. I thinke a fourth part
the nobles of England in the fleett. This I send on shore to Sowle, to
take its fortune towards thee. Being in hast, have not tyme to wright
any body else. If my broʳ Bradenham be in towne, shew him this letter.
I two dayes since recᵈ a letter from Mr. Clarke, yᵉ apothecary, wᵗʰ
a case of spiritts, come very opertunely (as he wrights me) to raise
my courage, but I have not yet tasted them. Pray returne him my kind
thanks. I hope shall survive this warr to make him amends. My deare, I
should be glad to heare from the, but I know not how. I shall not be
wanting to give the a constant advice, as opertunity presents, of my
wellfare and our actions. Youl excuse me to my loveing relations yᵗ I
wright none of them. At present it is fowle weather. Am glad we gote
hither, for stormy weather may shatter us and disable us more then a
bataile. God Almighty be our guard and defence, and give us victory
over our enemyes. His providence hath hitherto prevented our ingageing
twice. My deare and loveing saluts to all my loveing relations at
Rederif,[b] and to my lo: Coz. Goodlad at Wapping and London, &c. Wᵗʰ
intire love and saluts to thyselfe wᵗʰ my daughter, I remaine

Thy loveing husband till death us part,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

His Royal Highness the Duke of Yorke is very zeolus to ingage yᵉ Dutch,
God sending a good opertunity and watter enough under our keels.

I had almost forgot to desire the to returne my thanks to Capt.
Grantham for yᵉ barill of Muscadine he brought me from Mr. Wilkinson,
of Messina, and for a chest of Florence he sent me from himselfe, wᵗʰ
seavrall other things, all wᶜʰ I recᵉᵈ, wᵗʰ a chest of Florence for my
Lord Sandwᶜʰ. Pray pay him three pound for itt. I shall recᵉ it heere
of Mr. Lowe, my Lord’s servᵗ. Thyne,

                                                            R. HADDOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] George Digby, 2nd Earl of Bristol.

[b] Rotherhithe.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

       R. James, in Southold Bay, this 25th May, 1672; Saturday evening.

MY DEAREST LOVE,

These I send by Capt. Poole,[a] who, wᵗʰ the Garland frigᵗᵗ in compᵃ,
hath leave to goe his former intended voaidge for Barbados. Pray advize
my broʳ Bradenham of itt. They will be good convoy for Mr. Naufan’s
ship wᵗʰ masts, &c., wᶜʰ lyes at Gravesend, to goe thorough the
Channell wᵗʰ them.

This day I gote two protections from the Duke, one for Mr. Naufan’s
ship at Lancaster for 50 men, yᵉ other for yᵉ ship wᵗʰ stores for 20
men, wᶜʰ is speciall protections, yᵗ the men will not be molested. Tell
my Broʳ Bradenham I have given them to Mr. Sam. Hawkes, who is comeing
wᵗʰ them.

I am sory to heare poore Sam Lane was prest into yᵉ French Victory, and
since caryed into Holland. I pitty the losse of the men in her, but yᵉ
Capt. will have his reward for looseing her soe basely. The Dutch fleet
lye now neare the Gallaper in expectation of us; we are very neere,
ready to waite on them. 2 or 3 days must not breake square wᵗʰ us; but
they are deceaved to think we intend to fight them amongst the sands.
I supose our martch wilbe over for yᵉ coast of Holland into sea roome
and deepe watter. We are, notwithstanding Capt. Poole and his consarts
leaveing us, 90 men of warr, 26 fire ships, many small vessells. I
supose the Dutch daylie add to ther strength as well as wee. God
Allmighty be our defence.

My deare, I am sory that my first letter from Southold, wᶜʰ went by
land, advized the of our 2 days stay, whereas we have bine heere 4
days, and shall stay 3 or 4 longer. Then we shall have wattered our
whole fleet for one month, and victualld compleat for 2 months, and
mand I beleive thoroughout yᵉ fleet, not 500 wanting. I rather think,
in a day or two longer, we may have 1000 supernumeraryes. A very worthy
brave fleet, I think, as ever were together. God give us couragious
hearts, and then I beleive they may be ventured.

I hope all my loveing relations at Rederif and Wapping are in health,
to whome present my love and saluts. I expect to heare from the by the
yacht wᶜʰ I sent my last letter by, Captain Burstow, Comander.[b] I
blesse God I am now in good health, though 5 or 6 days since, and when
we were going to fight the Dutch, I had such a paine in my right arme
that could not use it but very litle; but now, thanke God, am very
well. My deare Betty, I have only to add my saluts to thyselfe wᵗʰ my
daughter; doe remaine thyne till death us part,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

This I intended thee by Capt. Poole, but was gone ere I could put it
on bord him; therfore doe send it by the post. I recᵈ last night broʳ
Thornbrugh’s letter, 23 instant, by yᵉ Dreadnought’s Leivetenᵗ. He
wrights me of thy health, and yᵗ I shall recᵉ a letter from the by yᵉ
Hatton ketch.

I am thyne,

                                                            R. HADDOCK.

    26 May, ’72.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Sir William Poole, distinguished by his share in the reduction of
Tobago, this year.

[b] William Bustow or Burstow, commanding the Mary yacht.




COPY OF CAPTAIN RICHARD HADDOCK’S[a] ACCOUNT, GIVEN HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE DUKE OF YORK, OF THEIR ENGAGEMENT, MAY 28TH, 1672, IN THE ROYAL
JAMES.

In obedience to your Royal Highness’s commands, I here humbly present
to your view a brief narrative of our actions on board the Royal James,
the 28th May last past, as followeth:

Upon signal from our scouts of the Dutch fleet’s approach (betwixt 3
and 4, the wind E. by S.), we put our ships immediately into a fighting
posture, brought our cable to the capston, and heaft a peak of our
anchor, which, upon firing a gun and loosing foretop-sail of your Royal
Highness’s ship, we presently weighed, and afterwards lay kedging with
our headsails at the mast till our anchor was up; which done (steered
N.E. by N.), we made sail and stood off, with our signal abroad for
the squadron[b] to draw into their line of battle, which was done as
well as the short time we had would permit. But, finding myself one of
the weathermost ships, I bore to leeward till I had brought ourselves
in a line; the Vice Admiral and part of his division right a head, the
Rear Admˡ and his right astern; only two or three frigates to leeward,
and so near, one of them within call. The Dutch squadron, Van Ghent,
attacked us in the body and rear very smartly, and let the van go ahead
sometime without engaging them, so far as I could perceive. We engaged
about an hour and an half very smartly. When the Dutch found that they
could do no good on us with their men of war, they attacked us with
two fire ships, the first of which we fired with our shott, the second
disabled by shooting down his yards. Before which time I had sent our
barge, by my Lord’s[c] command, ahead to Sir Joseph Jordaine,[d] to
tack, and with his division to weather the Dutch that were upon us
and beat them down to leeward of us, and come to our assistance. Our
pinnace I sent likewise astern (both coxswains living) to command our
ships to come to our assistance; which never returned, but were on
board several who endeavoured it but could not effect it.

About two hours after we engaged we were boarded athwart hawse by one
of their men of war, notwithstanding our endeavours to prevent him
by wearing our ship two or three points from the wind to have taken
him alongside. When he had been athwart our hawse some short time,
my Lord would have had me boarded him with our men and taken him,
which I refused to do by giving him my reason that it would be very
disadvantageous to us: first, that I must have commanded our men from
our guns, having then I believe 300 men killed and wounded, and could
not expect but to lose 100 in taking him; secondly, had we so done,
we could not have cut him loose from us, by reason the tide of flood
bound him fast; and, thirdly, had we plyed our guns slowly by taking
away our men, we had given cause to the enemy to believe we had been
disabled, and consequently more of them would have boarded us, which
might possibly have overpressed us, and would have been more dishonour
to have lost her by that means than being at last burnt;--so that my
Lord was satisfied with my reasons, and resolved we should cuff it out
to the last man, still in expectation of assistance.

About 10 o’clock Van Ghent himself, finding those his other flags could
do no good upon us, nor the party with them, came up with us himself,
we having lost the conduct of our ship. He ranged along our side, gave
us a smart volley of small shot and his broadside, which we returned to
him with our middle and lower tier, our upper guns almost all disabled,
the men killed at them. He passed ahead of us and brought his ship too
to leeward, and there lay till I was gone off the deck.

Some short time after, Sir Joseph Jordaine (our barge having been with
him and given him my Lord’s commands) passed by us very unkindly to
windward, with how many followers of his division I remember not, and
took no notice at all of us; which made me call to mind his saying to
your Royal Highness, when he received his commission, that he would
stand betwixt you and danger; which I gave my Lord account of, and did
beleive by his acting yourself might be, in his view, in greater danger
than we, which made my Lord answer me: “We must do our best to defend
ourselves alone.”

About 12 o’clock I was shot in the foot with a small shot, I supposed
out of Van Ghent’s main top, which pressed me after a small time to go
down to be dressed. I gave my Lord account of it, and resolved to go
up again as soon as was dressed. In the mean time, when I went off the
deck, sent up both Sir Charles[e] and Lieutenant Mayo[f] to stand by
my Lord; and, as soon as I came down, remembring the flood was done,
sent up to my Lord to desire him to command the ship to anchor by the
stern, which was immediately done; and, after we had brought up, the
ship athwart our hawse fell away, and being entangled with our rigging
our men boarded and took her, cut her loose from us, and, at my Lord’s
command, returned all aboard again. Upon which I, hearing the ship was
loose, sent up to my Lord that the cable might be cut and the ship
brought to sail before the wind, and loose our mainsail; which was
presently done. Then my Lord sent me his thanks for my advice, and
withall doubted not but to save the ship. At that time the surgeon was
cutting off the shattered flesh and tendons of my toe; and immediately
after we were boarded by the fatal fire ship that burnt us.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] The MS., which is a modern transcript, has “Sir Richard Haddock;”
but he was not knighted until 1675, and therefore, for uniformity, the
title is suppressed.

[b] The blue squadron.

[c] Earl of Sandwich.

[d] Sir Joseph Jordan, Vice-Admiral of the Blue. See a defence of
his conduct, as described in this letter, in Charnock’s _Biographia
Navalis_.

[e] Sir Charles Harbord, who served as a volunteer and perished.

[f] Thomas Mayo. He was one of the few who escaped from the Royal James.




CAPTAIN RICHARD HADDOCK TO HIS WIFE.

                         On bord the R. Charles, this 29th May, 1673;
                                                7 leagues of Oostend.

MY DEAREST LOVE,

These are to give the an accᵗ of God’s goodnes to me. I am very well
and in health, praised be His name therfore. Yesterday, the 28th
instant (yᵉ same day twelve month they atacqued us in Sowle bay), we
atacqued the Dutch fleet, consisting of 74 or 76 men of warr and 20
fire ships, as the Dutch prisoners informe us. We set upon them in
the Schoon Velt, the wind at W.N.Wᵗ., but changed to yᵉ N.N.E. in the
bataile towards evening. We buoyed the outward banks wᵗʰ our smacks
and ketches, and had a smart brush with them from 12 at noone as long
as daylight lasted. The damage we have done them we certainly know
not. Severall of ther ships we disabled, wᶜʰ we forced into leewards.
Trump, whose squadron we ingaged wᵗʰ ours, shifted his ship once, if
not twice. What number of men we have lost in the fleet not yet know;
I believe not 500. In our ship not above 20, as I can learne; some
mortality wounded, others dismembred. Amongst our dead men is poore
Capt. Wasey, who first lost his arme close to his shoulder, and about
6 howers after dyed of his wounds. My brother Joseph very well; was
wᵗʰ me last night after yᵉ bataile. My unckle Richard very well: he
hath burnt his ship; was faire to burne De Rutter within his length,
when they shote his masts about his eares; for wᶜʰ indeavoured service
yᵉ Prince[a] hath given him one hundred pounds, and gratified also
his oficers, &c. I supose we shall not atacque them in that place
againe. Our greatest care was to keepe cleere of the sands in that
narrow hole. Our ship, so tender with a saile that we fought wᵗʰ the
watter some tymes comeing into our lower tire of ports, wᶜʰ was very
disadvantagious, could not do that service intended by us.

There is severall Capᵗˢ killed that we have already an account of;
I hope no more. Capt. Finch in the Yorke, Capt. Tempest in the
Sweepestakes, Capt. Fowles in the Lyon; and Capt. Werden, in the
Heneretta, mortality wounded.[b] We have severall of our ships
shattered, not above two disabled, and none, as I heare of, lost, but 2
or 2 fire ships burnt.

We ride now wᵗʰin 3 leagues of the Dutch fleete; they ride in the place
we atacqued them in, and we in our former birth, only about 2 leagues
further of the shore. How soone we shall fight them againe cannot
resolve, but in yᵉ place they now ride I iudge we shall not atacque
them a second tyme. I beleive the Prince may shift his ship and goe
into some other; but of yᵗ in my next.

I desire that thanks and prayes may be returned to Almighty God for his
preservation of me. My humble duty to my deare mother; loving saluts
to my brothers and sisters, and all my deare relations. God in mercy
blesse and preserve them all, and send us a joyfull meeteing. Wᵗʰ my
intire love and saluts to thee wᵗʰ my daughter and litle Dickee, I
remaine

Thine, till death us part,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

We have a rumor that Capt. Trevanion[c] is killed, comdᵍ the
Dreadnought; but I hope it is not true.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Rupert.

[b] William Finch, third son of Thomas, first Earl of Winchilsea; John
Tempest, Thomas Foules, and Robert Werden. The last was not killed in
this action, according to Charnock, _Biogr. Navalis_.

[c] Richard Trevanion. He was not killed. He followed James II. into
exile.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                          Yet on bord yᵉ R. Charles, this 31 May, 1673.

MY DEARE BETTY,

I wrote the two dayes since of God’s goodnes to mee in oʳ late bataile.
I gave the accᵗ of Capt. Trevanions suposed to be killed, but he is
well; and allso Capt. Courtney,[a] wᶜʰ was reported to be killed, is
alive and well. Capt. Worden is since dead of his wounds.[b] We are
now shifting ships, goeing on bord the London; the reason I gave in my
last. Sʳ Jnᵒ Harman[c] goes from the London into the Sovraigne, and
Capt. Hayward[d] out ye Sovraigne into this ship. It is no smal trouble
to me to part from this brave ship; her only fault is she is tender
sided, in all respects otherwayes the best ship in the world.

My deare, I am very well; My broʳ Joseph and unckle Richard likewise.
The Prince in good health, and our fleet prepareing for another
incounter, if the Dutch comes out. My deare, I am thyne till death,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.

Pray, if Comʳ Deane[e] be not in towne, send forward the inclosed to
Portsmᵒ.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Francis Courtney. He fell in the action with the Dutch on the 11th
August of this year.

[b] This is denied. (See above, p. 20, note b.)

[c] Became Vice-Admiral of the Red, on the death of Sir Edward Spragge,
this year.

[d] John Hayward. He fell in the action of 11th August, this year.

[e] Anthony Deane, Commissioner of the Navy at Portsmouth.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                         R. Charles, rideing Nᵒ, 7 leagues from Oostend,
                                            this 1st June, 1673; Sonday.

MY DEARE BETTY,

Wee ride in sight of our neighbours the Dutch, not above 3 in 4 leagues
distant. This morning they were under saile; we thought they would
have come of to us. We put ourselves in a posture to recᵉ them. They
have now the wind of us, being easterly; and may come out if they
please. This morning we have accᵗ from a good hand from Oostend yᵗ
they sent in 6 or 7 disabled ships to Flushing, two whereof sunck in
going in. They likewise sent on shore 400 or 500 wounded men, and, as
they advize from Oostend, comᵈ was given not to speake of the fight at
Flushing. So doe beleive, till they recrute ther strength, we shall not
heare of them; however, we are not wanting to prepare ourselves agᵗ
they come. The Swiftsure is this day come to us; had like to have bine
snapt Tuesday last by the Amsterdam squadron yᵗ came into the Schoon
Velt tyme enough to fight.

I have but little else to write to thee. Sʳ Roger Strickland sends his
hoy to Deptford for watter; and these goe by Sʳ Ed. Spragg’s yacht, who
caryes up one Coll. Hambliton into the River, who lost his legg on bord
us. Pray lett me heare from thee by one or both of them. My humble duty
to my deare mother; love and saluts to all freinds in genˡˡ. Wᵗʰ my
deare love to thy selfe, my daughter, and little Richard, I remayne

Thyne, till death us part,

                                                       RICHARD HADDOCK.




JOURNAL [OF CAPTAIN RICHARD HADDOCK] IN HIS MAJᵗʸˢ SHIP R. CHARLES,
MAY, 1673.

_Aᵒ. 1673._

May 11. This Sonday morneing, about 7 aclock, we anchored in the
Prince’s fleet, to the westwards of them, about 2 leagues to the
westwards of Dongenesse, in 1 fadom watter, yᵉ lighthouse beareing N.E.
by E. This day I went on bord the St. Michell to waite on yᵉ Prince,
who comanded me to weigh and plye up to his ship; but, bloweing so
hard, could not.

12. This Monday morneing wind at N.E. and N.E. by N.; blew very hard,
and raine some part of the forenoone; could not weigh.

13. This Tuesday morneing, yᵉ wind at north, we wayed and gote up to
the Prince’s ship, the St. Michel; anchored alongst her side without
her. This forenoone his Highnes Prince Rupert came on bord us, but went
of at noone; dyned on bord the R. Prince; after diner returned on bord
us. This day we tooke on bord all the Prince’s retenue and goods, &c.;
struck downe some of our gunns into hold, to recᵉ new ones in ther
roomes. All this afternoone yᵉ wind at north; constant rain.

14. This Wedensday we tooke on bord seaverall of the new gunns and
mounted them. The wind this day came round from the N.W. to S.Wᵗ., S.E.
and E. by Nᵒ. This day the French fleet apeared in sight about noone;
being litle wind, they anchored short of us about 3 leagues.

15. This Thursday we mounted all the rest of the new gunns; the wind at
N.Eᵗ. to E.N.E. Yᵉ French fleet wayed and plyed towards us; anchored
about 4 miles short of us.

16. This Fryday morneing the French fleet weighed and plyed up to us.
About 9 a clock this morneing Monsʳ Conte d’Estrees,[a] ther Admˡˡ,
who wore his flagg at yᵉ foretopmast head, being V. Admˡˡ of Fraunce,
past by us about musket shote or somewᵗ more asterne of us; struck his
flagg, lored his topsailes and saluted us, I meane yᵉ Prince, wᵗʰ 13
peece of ordnance; we returned him eleven in answer. Presantly after
Monsʳ Conte d’Estrees came on bord us, to waite on his Highnes yᵉ
Prince. This evening came of from Rye his Majᵗʸ and R. Highnes in there
yachts; came on bord us; stayed about one hower and a halfe, and then
returned to the yachts againe after 8 at night.

17. This Satuarday morneing, the wind at N. by E., blowing very fresh,
the Prince went on bord the Cleeveland yacht to waite upon his Majᵗʸ;
and about ½ an hower after the King, Duke, and Prince came on bord this
ship. This forenoone we spread a standard in the mizen shrowds, fired a
gunn to call on bord us the flagg oficers. This day the King and Duke
dyned on bord us. The wind hath blowne very hard at N.N.E. and N.E. by
N. all day.

18. This Sonday the wind vered to the east and by north, and back to
yᵉ N.N.Eᵗ. at night; blew very fresh all day. This day the King dyned
on bord Conte d’Estrees; the standard at maine topmast head; his flagg
struck wᶜʰ he wore at the foretopmast head. This evening the King and
Duke supt on bord us, and at 9 aclock tooke ther leaves of us and went
on shore to Rye. This day the noble Lord Ossory[b] hoysted the Reare
Admˡˡ blew flagg on bord the St. Michael.

19. This Monday morning, about 3 aclock, being at anchor still, the
wind at E.N.Eᵗ., we designed to weigh, but, bloweing fresh, we rode
fast all this day.

20. This Tuesday, at 3 in the morneing, being alaramed by seavrall
gunns from the eastwards, we fired a gunn and put out a light in the
mainetopmast shrowds, our signall of weighing, but did not weigh by
reason of the ebb tyde, the wind being at S.Eᵗ. We had intelligence,
by a sloop, of 70 saile of Hollanders seene on the back of yᵉ Goodwin,
and wᵗʰout the Sᵒ Sands Head; but proved to be, by our 2d intelligence
by the litle Greyhound, a fleet of Hamburghers of 26 saile only. This
forenoone we weighed with all the fleet; stood to the southwards; at
noone tackt; litle wind. We anchored about 2 aclock, yᵉ Nesse light
howse N. by E., in 21 fadoms, 7 miles distance. This day his Highnes
the Prince dyned on bord the Conte d’Estrees, who struck his flagg
as soone as the Prince was on bord him, and the Prince’s Jack flagg
hoysted up at mainetopmast head; and, whilst the Prince remaind on bord
him, his flagg (I meane yᵉ Conte d’Estrees) was kept furld. Towards
evening the Hamburgʳˢ fleet plyed by us to the wᵗwards; gave us many
gunns in saluts. Yᵉ wind, since 4 in the afternoone, at W.S.W. and Wᵗ.
This night we rode fast.

21. This 21 day, Wedensday morneing, at 4 aclock, we wayed wᵗʰ the
whole fleet; wind at W. by Nᵒ., a fine fresh gale. By 10 aclock the
wind came to yᵉ S.Wᵗ. We steered away on the back of the Goodwin. About
4, afternoone, we anchored in 10 fadom watter, on the flatts of the
Nᵒ Forland, the lighthouse beareing W. by S. southerly, about 6 miles
distant.

22. This Thursday morneing we wayed by 5 aclock; steered away E. by
Nᵒ. and E.N.Eᵗ. to goe cleare of the showld of the Falls;[c] the wind
at S.W., a fine gale. After we had gote without ye Falls, we hauled up
E. b. S. and E.S.E.; a fresh gale at S.W. About 4 in the afternoone we
made the coast of Flaunders. At 6, evening, we anchored in 15 fadoms
watter, Oostend spire steeples beareing S.E. by Sᵒ, 5 leagues distant.
This evening we saw the Dutch fleet, part of them; they rode in
Schonvelt. Our scout gave us accᵗ they were but 86 saile, the outside,
small and great. They wayed and turned up amongst yᵉ bancks towards the
Weelings.

23. This Fryday morneing, by 6 aclock, yᵉ flood being done, we wayed;
wind at S.S.W., litle wind. We stood in; drew our ships into a lyne of
batayle. Our squadron ledd the van, the French in the midle, and yᵉ
blew squadron in the reare. We sayled and drove soe farr to the N.E.
wards that we brought Oostend steeples south easterly, about 5 leagues
or six leagues of. Anchored in 11 fadom watter, within the oyster
bancks. Yᵉ Dutch fleet, yᵉ nᵒmost, bore E.N.E.; and yᵉ southmost Eᵗ,
southerly from us, about 3 leagues. This night have had but litle wind
at S.S.W. and S.Wᵗ.

24. This Satuarday morneing we intended, if the should watter hindred
not, to goe in wᵗʰ our fleet and set upon the Dutch; sending a party
of 35 men of warr, 13 fire ships, and 24 tendors ahead of us, to make
the onsett, and we wᵗʰ the whole fleet to have seconded them. But this
our intention was this day prevented by God Almighty’s providence, the
wind bloweing very hard at S.W. and Wᵗ.S.Wᵗ. This morneing came in to
the fleet the Soveraigne, Victory, and Dyamond, out of the river of
Thames. Yesterday our scouts gave us accᵗ that yᵉ Dutch fleet, of all
sorts that could be told, did not exceed 84. All this day the wind hath
blowne very hard at S.W. and W.S.W.; forct us strick our yard, and some
ships both topmast and yard.

25. This Sonday the wind hath blowne very hard at W.S.Wᵗ.; forct us in
yᵉ afternoone to strick our topmasts and get our sprit-saile yard under
the boltsprit. This day severall of the French ships broke from ther
ground tackle, but brought up againe wᵗʰ other anchors and rode fast.

26. This Monday, in the forenoon, the wind continued bloweing hard at
W.S.W., as did also the night past, but not so violently as the day
formerly. In the afternoone the wind dullered. We sett our topmasts and
got up oʳ yards; our neighbours the Dutch did the like also. Toward
evening indiferent faire weather.

27. This Tuesday the wind hath bine from the S.Wᵗ. back to yᵉ S.Eᵗ.,
wᵗʰ very thick weather, and then veered to the N.Wᵗ., wᵗʰ some tymes
very thick [weather] and raine and wind; all this day very unconstant
weather. This afternoone we spread our red flagg for the severall
divissions drawne out of the fleet to get themselves into a body for
the first onsett upon the enemy; but did not weigh ourselves. Our
party out of our squadron anchored to leewards of us, and neere half
way betweene yᵉ Dutch fleet and ours. This day yᵉ standard was spread
for the flagg oficers. When come on bord, twas resolved that tomorrow,
about 10 in the morning, the flood being done and faire weather, that
we weigh and atacque the Dutch fleet now rideing in the Schoonvelt,
steereing with an easey saile upon them; and, in case they go in to
Flushing, then to anchor in their places; and, that they stand of into
sea, to stand out with them.

28. This Wedensday morneing, being indiferent faire weather, we
prepared our ship; gote upp our sheat anchor, slung our yards, &c. The
wind at west, a fresh gale. By 10 aclock we gote up our anchor, and
made sayle. Brave weather; wind at W. b. N. and W.N.Wᵗ. We wᵗʰ our
squadron steered N.E. b. E. wᵗʰ the north end of the Dutch fleet, yᵉ
French wᵗʰ the body, and yᵉ blew squadron wᵗʰ the south part of them.
To 11 aclock thay rode most of them fast at anchor, not so much as ther
fore topsailes loose. About 12 at noone we bore downe upon the Dutch
and ingaged ther van, and the French in the body, our blew squadron in
the reare. We fought till twas darke, tacking to and againe in the
Schoon Velt. What certaine damage we did the enemy we cannot tell. This
night we sailed and drove out againe; came into 6 fadom watter on yᵉ
oyster banck. By day light we were gote 3 leagues without the Schoon
Velt.

29. This Thursday morneing we anchored in 13 fadom watter by our
judgement, S. b. Eᵗ. from Oostend, 6 or 7 leagues of. This day yᵉ
Prince called a councill of flagg oficers. Ordered, that yᵉ respective
flaggs call ther divissions on bord and take accᵗ of what damages recᵈ
yesterday in the bataile. This day the wind blew very hard at S.Wᵗ.;
forct us to strick our topmasts and yards and veere out our shot of
cable 2½ without bord. This afternoone, about 3 aclock, the Prince sent
away a packet for Whitehall, by whome I wrote for London.

30. This Fryday the wind blew very hard, most part of the day, at S.Wᵗ.
and W.S.Wᵗ. Towards evening lesse wind. We got up our topmasts.

31. This Satuarday forenoone, foggy weather; afternoone, very faire
weather; the wind at N.Eᵗ. This day the Prince tooke resolution to
shift shipps, ours being so tender that we could not beare out our
lower tire of gunns in the late bataile.

June 1. This Sonday, yᵉ first day of June, the Dutch fleet many of
them were under saile, but came not out to us. We gote up our anchor
and came to saile wᵗʰ all the fleet, but anchored againe and birth’t
our selves in our anchoring posture agreed on, to say: the flaggs to
ride N. and south of each other, 4 cables length distant; and the ships
of the severall divissions to ride N.W. and S.E. from there flaggs,
2 cable length distant of one side and the other; the flagg ships as
they are ranged in ther line of bataile. This day we struck some broken
gunns down into hold, and some whole, to the number of tenn, to stiffen
our ship if posible.

2. This Monday the wind blowes very fresh at N.E., and did so all the
last night and the day before. This day the Prince resolved to shift
his ship and goe on bord the R. Soveraigne.

3. This Tuesday evening his Highnes the Prince went on bord the
Soveraigne. I and Capt. Young[d] followed him, and this night lay on
bord her.

4. This Wedensday morneing, very early, I went on bord the R. Charles
to shift the men. Chose out 250 men to come on bord the Soveraigne.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Jean, Comte d’Estrées.

[b] Thomas Butler, Earl of Ossory.

[c] A long narrow shoal off the North Foreland.

[d] Henry Young.




JOURNALL IN THE R. SOVERAIGNE, JUNE, 1673.

This 4th day of June, Wedensday, before noone, the Dutch fleet, then
rideing in Schoonvelt, all wayed and came to saile and came out to us.
We wayed with our fleet; put ourselves in the best posture we could;
but, makeing saile, we gote ahead next the blew squadron, leaveing most
of the French in the reare, with our Vice Admirall. Betwixt 4 and 5
aclock the Dutch fleet--Trump in the van, De Rutter in the body--bore
downe towards us (the wind at N.Eᵗ., a very fresh gale). We ingaged
till twas darke, more then ½ range of our shot distant. We kept our
lufe; they did likewise the same; would not come close to us. What
damage we did them we know not. On our parts we lost 2 fire ships;
shatterd our ships, many of them, in hull, masts, yards, and rigging.
Comdʳˢ killed were: Capt. White of the Warspight, and Capt. Sadleton of
the Crowne.[a] What number of men slaine in the fleet, know not. This
night we stood to the northwards with our foresaile and mainetopsailes
only. Most of the Dutch fleet, at 12 aclock at night, tackt away from
us; the remainder tackt after them at 2 aclock.

5. Betwixt 4 and 5 we tackt of after them; stood of wᵗʰ 2 topsailes;
put out our Jack flagg. Called a council of warr to know the condition
of our fleet; found our ships to be shatred in our masts and rigging,
not to be repaired in the sea; our powder and shot the greatest part
spent in two batailes. Haveing no shot in the fleet for recrute, twas
resolved by the Prince, for the more expedition (_sic_) fitting the
fleet out againe, to saile for the buoy of the Nore. We tackt; stood in
for the shore, seeing Laistoforland.[b] Stood away alongst the shore,
wᵗʰout the sands called Alborough knapes. The wind at N.E., we steered
away S.W. by S., haveing an ebb tyde to goe without the Shipwash.[c]
The flood comeing upon us sett us in so neare yᵉ Sheepewash, that we
were within a mile and a halfe of itt. We hauld of south, and, after we
were about that sand, we steered up the Swine.[d] After 8 at night we
anchored in 13 fadom watter, above the Gunflit at least 2 miles. All
the fleet likewise anchored.

6. This Fryday morneing the wind came to the S.W.; litle wind. We wayed
to plye up, and plyed the tyde to an end. Anchored about 2 miles belowe
the Midle Ground buoy,[e] in 8 fadom watter.

7. This Satuarday, 8 in the morning, we wayed; wind at Wᵗ. and W. b. N.
We turned up as high as the Oase Edge buoy;[f] there anchored and rode
all night.

8. This Sonday, wind at east, we wayed and ran up to the buoy of the
Nore. There anchored, about a mile below the buoy.

9. This Monday the wind blew very hard at Eᵗ and E.S.Eᵗ, with raine;
forct us to strick our topmasts and yards. The wind hath blowne very
hard all this day, and vered back to the E.N.Eᵗ.

10. This Tuesday, wind came to the north. Slaby weather and cold;
bloweing a fresh gale.

11. This Wedensday wind at N.Wᵗ. and north. This day the King and Duke
came on bord us. At night, after they had supt, went on bord ther
yachts.

12. This Thursday the wind at Eᵗ to S.Eᵗ. The King came out Sheerenes
about noone and dyned on bord us. This evening his Majᵗʸ and Duke of
Yorke tooke there leave of us and went in ther yachts to London.

13. This Fryday the wind blew hard at E.N.Eᵗ. This day we were falcely
allarum’d by the Holmes frigᵗᵗ comeing up from the Gunflet wᵗʰ
topgalant sails flying and fired gunns, uppon a certaine, or rather
uncertaine, intelligence that 19 or 20 saile of Dutch men of warr were
seene wᵗʰout the Gallaper. All this day it hath blowne very hard, wᵗʰ
some raine.

14. This Satuarday morneing, about 5 aclock, his Highnes Prince Rupert
went up the river in our barge for Black Heath. The wind at S.Eᵗ. This
day Sʳ John Harman, upon the receipt of a packet from Whitehall, called
a councill of warr. There ordered to send downe 7 or 8 frigᵗᵗˢ and as
many fireships, to ride twixt the Oase Edge and Redd Sand,[g] and the
rest to birth themselves N.N.E. and S.S.W. one of each other, at yᵉ
Nore.

15. This Sonday the wind hath bine from north to W.S.W.; little
wind till evening. It then blew hard, westerly. This day we had
intelligence, by a Hellicar land[h] dogger, that 17 saile of Dutch men
of warr were rideing without the Gonflitt. Yesterday he was on bord
them.

16. This Monday the wind hath bine at Wᵗ. bloweing fresh. Towards
evening the wind came to the S.S.Wᵗ. This day I sent up the Barbabella
wᵗʰ our empty caske to London. Tookeing (_sic_) aship of beere about 60
ts.

17. This Tuesday wind at S.E.; faire weather; I sent Bassets hoy up to
Chatham againe for stores.

18. This Wedensday morning wind at south and S.Eᵗ. I went into yᵉ
Swale, to setle our muster booke of the R. Charles.

19. This Thursday wind at north and N.Wᵗ.; some tyme badd weather.

20. This Fryday we tooke on bord 16 ts. of watter. The wind hath bine
at north and back to W.S.Wᵗ.; sometymes badd weather.

21. This Satuarday the wind at S.W. In the afternoone the Prince
returned on bord againe.

22. This Sonday wind southerly. The Prince went into Sheerenes.

23. This Monday wind at S.S.W. to W.N.Wᵗ.; sometymes bad weather. This
day yᵉ Prince went on shore on Essex side; came on bord againe at
noone. This day severall of our fleet came out Sheerenes.

29. To this Sonday we have had the winds southerly to the west; some 3
days badd weather. Have bine dispatching our ships out Sheerenes, and
takeing in our provissions. The Dutch fleet rideing in the Slade Way
and at the Gonflitt since Wedensday. This night his Highnes yᵉ Prince
lay on bord the Monmouth yacht.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Richard White and Richard Sadlington.

[b] Lowestoft Ness.

[c] The Shipwash sand-bank off the mouth of the Deben.

[d] The King’s Channel or East Swin, running down east of the Gunfleet
sands, off the Essex shore.

[e] The Middle Ground shoal lies at the mouth of the Thames, some miles
below the Nore, on the Kentish side of the river.

[f] The Oaze Edge shoal near the Middle Ground, but on the Essex side.

[g] The Red Sand lies between the Ooze Edge and the Middle Ground.

[h] Heligoland.




NAVAL OPERATIONS, 1652-1673; WITH OBSERVATIONS BY CAPTAIN RICHARD
HADDOCK.

  -----+-------+-----+------------------------+---------------------------
  Year.|  Mo.  | D.  |                        |      Observations.
  -----+-------+-----+------------------------+---------------------------
       |       |     |                        |
  1652 |June[a]| 19  |Fight in Downes between |Genˡ Blake comanded. Fight
       |       |     |English and Dutch.      |to the wᵗward off Dover.
       |       |     |                        |
       | Sept. |  5  |French fleet beat by    |Genˡ Blake comanded.
       |       |     |English                 |
       |       |     |                        |
       | Nov.  |15[b]|Blake worsted by Dutch. |True; and retired to the
       |       |     |                        |Buoy of the Nore over the
       |       |     |                        |Flats.
       |       |     |                        |
       | Feb.  | 18, |Fight near Portland.    |True. Blake, Deane, and
       |       | 19, |Dutch beaten.           |Monck. Genˡ Blake and
       |       | 20  |                        |Deane in the Tryumph;
       |       |     |                        |Monk in the Vanguard.
       |       |     |                        |Blake wounded.
       |       |     |                        |
       |       |     |English worsted in      |True. Capᵗ Rᵈ Balilo
       |       |     |Levant by Dutch.        |commanded.
       |       |     |                        |
       | June  |--[c]|Dutch beaten.           |Deane and Monk Genˡˢ.
       |       |     |                        |Deane killed.
       |       |     |                        |
   ’53 | July  | 29, |Fight between English   |True. Dutch beaten. Genˡ
       |       | 30  |and Dutch.[d]           |Monk only comanded. Trump
       |       |     |                        |killed, and his flag shot
       |       |     |                        |down.
       |       |     |                        |
   ’64 | Dec.  | 30  |Fleet off Portsmouth    |True. Brought into Portsmᵒ
       |       | [e] |took  112 Dutch prizes. |and afterwards made prizes.
       |       |     |                        |
   ’65 | Aprˡ  | 20  |De Ruyter attempted     |True.
       |       |     |Berbadoes; and beaten.  |
       |       |     |                        |
       | May   | 30  |Hamburgh fleet taken by |True. Were taken with their
       |       |     |Dutch.                  |convoy.
       |       |     |                        |
       | June  |  3  |Dutch beaten by yᵉ      |True. Opdam then blown up;
       |       |     |Duke, and 30 capitˡ     |the rest taken and burnt.
       |       |     |ships taken and         |
       |       |     |destroyed.              |
       |       |     |                        |
       | Aug.  | 16  |Dutch Smerna Streights  |True; and was forced away by
       |       |     |East India ships        |the Danes and Dutch, who
       |       |     |attacqu’d by Rʳ Admˡ    |landed ther guns contrary
       |       |     |Tiddiman[f] in Bergen.  |to, the concert between the
       |       |     |                        |two Crowns of England
       |       |     |                        |and Denmark.[g]
       |       |     |                        |
       | Sept. |  4  |2 East India and sevˡ   |True; and two men-of-war
       |       |     |merchᵗ ships taken by   |then taken by Sprag in the
       |       |     |E. of Sandwich.         |Rˡ James, formerly called
       |       |     |                        |the Richard.
       |       |     |                        |
       |   ”   |  9  |18 sˡ of Dutch beaten,  |True.
       |       |     |and greatest part taken.|
       |       |     |                        |
       | Feb.  |  8  |Dutch chas’d into       |True.
       |       |     |Weilings by Myngs[h].   |
       |       |     |                        |
   ’66 | June  |  1  |Duke Albemᵃ engaged 90  |Fought 3 days. Then came
       |       |     |sˡ of Dutch on coast    |Prince Rupert in the Rˡ
       |       |     |of  Flanders.           |James, wᵗʰ the squadron
       |       |     |                        |wᶜʰ had been to the
       |       |     |                        |westwᵈ to look out for
       |       |     |                        |Beaufort from Toulon. Were
       |       |     |                        |sent for back. Yᵉ 3ᵈ day,
       |       |     |                        |Sonday, on our retreat, the
       |       |     |                        |Rˡ Prince was lost on the
       |       |     |                        |Galliper; set on
   ”   | June  |  4, |Dutch beaten.           |fire. The Swiftsure taken
       |       |  5, |                        |by the Dutch. The 4ᵗʰ day
       |       |  6  |                        |both fleets retird: Prince
       |       |     |                        |Rupert and Duke of Albemarle
       |       |     |                        |to the Nore, the Dutch
       |       |     |                        |to their own coast.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | July  | 25, |Dutch beaten by Prince  |The Dutch run home to their
       |       | 26  |Rupert and Dᵏ           |harbours.
       |       |     |Albemarle.              |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | Augᵗ  |  7  |Sʳ Rᵗ Holmes burnt      |True. Sʳ Rᵗ Holmes went in
       |       |     |150 Dutch in yᵉ Fly.    |the Tyger wᵗʰ the Dragon
       |       |     |                        |and some fireships and
       |       |     |                        |ketches. Burnt 3 men of
       |       |     |                        |war that were in the Fly
       |       |     |                        |amongst the number.
       |       |     |                        |Afterwards burnt the town of
       |       |     |                        |Brandros[i] before he went
       |       |     |                        |out.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | Dec.  | 25  |Robinson[j] took and    |True. It was in his return
       |       |     |destroyed 3 Dutch men   |from Gottenburgh, whither
       |       |     |of warr near yᵉ         |he was sent to convoy
       |       |     |Texell.                 |home a great fleet laden
       |       |     |                        |with naval stores.
       |       |     |                        |
  1667 | April | 30  |Dutch attempted Burnt   |True, I beleive.
       |       |     |Isleand in Scotland     |
       |       |     |and beaten of.          |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | June  | 11  |12 Dutch taken and 2    |True.
       |       | [k] |sunck near Norway.      |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | June  | 20  |Rich Dutch East India   |True. Taken by Sʳ Jeremy
       |       |     |ship, 74 guns, taken.   |Smyth in his sayling about
       |       |     |                        |Scotland to Ireland.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | June  | 25  |Sʳ Jno. Harman wᵗʰ      |True.
       |       |     |16 Engl. men of warr    |
       |       |     |engaged 30 French near  |
       |       |     |Martinego; burnt and    |
       |       |     |destroyed most of them. |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   |       | 26  |8 Dutch prizes with     |True, I beleive.
       |       |     |masts and deals taken.  |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | July  | 19  |Dutch attemptᵈ Torbay,  |True.
       |       |     |but beaten off.         |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   |       | 23  |23 Dutch make up yᵉ     |
       |       |     |Thames.                 |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | July  | 24  |Fought by Spragg near   |True. He forc’t ’em out of
       |       |     |yᵉ Hope and retire.     |the River, after having
       |       |     |                        |burnt and taken 12 sayle
       |       |     |                        |of their fireships; and we
       |       |     |                        |lost but one of our 12. So
       |       |     |                        |forct them down the King’s
       |       |     |                        |channel below the Middle,[l]
       |       |     |                        |having but 6 men of war
       |       |     |                        |and 12 fireships. Sʳ Joseph
       |       |     |                        |Jordain came from Harwich
       |       |     |                        |in a smal man of war with
       |       |     |                        |sevˡ colliers made
       |       |     |                        |fireships. We rode then at
       |       |     |                        |Lee Road.[m] Dutch at the
       |       |     |                        |Nore. Wind blew hard
       |       |     |                        |easterly. Did no execution
       |       |     |                        |on the Dutch.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | Augᵗ  |  3  |De Ruyter attempts yᵉ   |True, but did no execution
       |       |     |Virginia fleet.         |on yᵐ.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   |       | 24  |Six Engl., cruiseing    |I beleive it true, but know
       |       |     |northwᵈ, fought a       |not of it.
       |       |     |squadron of Dutch       |
       |       |     |and took 3.             |
       |       |     |                        |
   ’71 | May   | 10  |10 Algerines burnt at   |True. The boom was first cut
       |       |     |Bugia by Sʳ Ed.         |by Capt. Harman,[n] that
       |       |     |Spragg.                 |comanded the boats.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | July  |  5  |Sʳ Christophʳ           |
       |       |     |restor’d by the French. |
       |       |     |                        |
   ’72 | Mar.  | 14  |Sʳ Rᵗ Holmes fought     |True; but ’twas not for
       |       |     |yᵉ Dutch refusing to    |refusing to strike.
       |       |     |strike.                 |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | May   | 28  |Fight wᵗʰ yᵉ whole      |True. In that fight the Rˡ
       |       |     |Dutch Fleet off         |James was burnt, after she
       |       |     |Southwold bay.          |had quitted herself of
       |       |     |                        |Brackel,[o] a Dutch 70 gun
       |       |     |                        |ship, that lay athwort her
       |       |     |                        |hawse, which she took; and
       |       |     |                        |being disabled gave
       |       |     |                        |opportunity of a fireship
       |       |     |                        |clapping her aboard.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | Dec.  | 20  |Tobago Island taken     |True.
       |       |     |from yᵉ Dutch.          |
       |       |     |                        |
   ’72 | Dec.  | 31  |Sᵗ Hellena taken by     |True.
       |       |     |yᵉ Dutch.               |
       |       |     |                        |
   ’73 | May   |  6  |Sᵗ Hellena retaken by   |True.
       |       |     |Capt. Monday.           |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | May   | 28  |Engl. Fleet engage yᵉ   |True. Fought in yᵉ
       |       |     |Dutch and force them    |Schonvelt.
       |       |     |to retreat.             |
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | June  |  4  |2ᵈ engagemᵗ wᵗʰ         |True. Fought yᵉ Dutch on
       |       |     |yᵉ Dutch on yᵉ coast.   |yʳ coast, but stood over to
       |       |     |                        |our own all that battle. The
       |       |     |                        |next morn we tackt on the
       |       |     |                        |Dutch: but they stood away
       |       |     |                        |for their own coast; and we
       |       |     |                        |stood back and came to the
       |       |     |                        |Nore after 2 battles in
       |       |     |                        |eight days.
       |       |     |                        |
   ”   | Aug.  | 11  |3ᵈ victory against yᵉ   |Fought the Dutch; but no
       |       |     |Dutch by Pʳ Rupert.     |great victory. The French
       |       |     |                        |declined fighting, and fleet
       |       |     |                        |retired to the Nore some
       |       |     |                        |time after. Sʳ Edwᵈ Sprag
       |       |     |                        |then drownd. Rˡ Prince’s
       |       |     |                        |mainmᵗ shot down; had like
       |       |     |                        |to have been burnt.
  -----+-------+-----+------------------------+----------------------------

[a] A mistake for May.

[b] On the 29th November. It was after this action that Van Tromp
hoisted the broom at his mast-head.

[c] On the 2nd and 3rd June, off the North Foreland.

[d] Off the Dutch coast.

[e] Before declaration of war, in retaliation for attacks by the Dutch
on the colonies.

[f] Sir Thomas Tiddiman, or Teddiman.

[g] The Governor of Bergen not having yet received the instructions
from his Government and refusing to admit the English fleet.

[h] Sir Christopher Mings; died of wounds received in the action of 1st
June.

[i] Bandaris in the island of Schelling.

[j] Sir Robert Robinson.

[k] The day that the Dutch were in the Medway.

[l] The Middle, a shoal off Foulness, between the West Swin and the
East Swin or King’s Channel.

[m] Near the mouth of the Thames, off the village of Lee on the Essex
side.

[n] Thomas Harman.

[o] Adrian Brackell, the captain of the Dutch man-of-war.




WILLIAM BRANDON TO SIR RICHARD HADDOCK.

                                           Portsmᵒ Victuallᵍ Office,
                                                    July 24ᵗʰ, 1688.

HONᵇˡᵉ Sʳ,

The last post brought a news letter to this place, wherein are these
words: It is reported that Sʳ Richᵈ Haddock, Capt. Pennyman, and
severall other seamen, are gone for Holland; wᶜʰ are lookt upon heere
as a verry greate reflection upon your Honʳ, that cannott without
ingratitude and breach of duty omit acquainting you with itt and the
author’s name, wᶜʰ is Edmond Sawkell, att the Generall Post Office. I
have and shall vindicate your Honʳ to my outmost power; and begg leave
to subscribe myself

Yoʳ Honʳˢ

Most humble and obedient servᵗ,

                                                          Wᵐ BRANDON.

    To the Honᵇˡᵉ Sʳ Richᵈ Haddock, Knᵗ, one of the Commʳˢ for
    Victualling his Majᵗʸˢ Navy, att the office on Tower Hill,
    London, These.




SIR RICHARD HADDOCK TO PHILIP FROWD.[a]

                              Tower Hill, London, this 29th July, 1688.

Sʳ,

The last weeke, in a news lettr wrote by a servᵗ of yours, one Mr. Edmᵈ
Sawkell, there is a scandallous reflection on my honʳ and reputation,
by his writeing that Sʳ Rᵈ Haddock wᵗʰ seuerall other seamen were gone
into Holland, wᶜʰ I have recᵈ aᶜᶜᵗ of sᵈ letter from 3 or 4 countys,
and must beleive it hath flowne all the kingdome over.

Sʳ, I was this day to waite on you at yʳ post ofice; but, haveing accᵗ
given me that you were in the country, thought fitt, before I spake
wᵗʰ Mr. Sawkill, to give you notice hereof, and yᵗ you will readylie
conclude I shall expect satisfaction from him for this scandall, at
least yᵗ he finds out his author or else must conclud him to be the
inventor himselfe. I do presume you know me so well as to beleive,
however the King may please to deale wᵗʰ me (wᶜʰ hetherto hath bine
extra kind), I shall never forsake my loyalty and duty to him, even to
my last breath. Praying a lyne or two in answer, with great respect, I
remaine

Your very afectᵉ servant,

                                                                  Rᵈ H.

    TO JN. (_sic_) FROWD, ESQ.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Postmaster-General.




CAPTAIN JOSEPH HADDOCK TO HIS BROTHER, SIR RICHARD HADDOCK.

                                  Abord the Ship Princess of Denmark,
                                     17th Xber, 1688. Balasore Roade.

Sʳ RICHᵈ HADDOCK.

MY EVER HONᵈ BROTHER,

My last, of the 7ᵗʰ Augᵗ from Visagapatam, gave yoʳ Honʳ accᵗ of our
arrivall Madras and of our affaires to that tyme. The 10ᵗʰ Augᵗ we
saild thence for Balasore, wher we arriv’d the 15ᵗʰ; in wᶜʰ bay we
have contᵈ and rid out the monsoone, wᶜʰ has prov’d favourabler then
expected (beinge leape yeare).

The 15ᵗʰ 7ber Capᵗ Heath arriv’d this place, who, by virtue of the
President and Counsell of Madras order requir’d my goeinge up wᵗʰ hime
to Chuttynutte[a] in the river of Hugly (the place where our Agent
and factorie resided), myselfe wᵗʰ the rest of the comandʳˢ of the
Europe Shipps then in the river to assist hime in the Rᵗ Honᵇˡᵉ Compˢ
affairs.[b] In fews days after our getting up to Chuttynutte, a letter
was writ to the Nabob of Dacca (the cheife govenʳ of that citty), who
had formerly requested our Agent that if we would assist hime wᵗʰ
ships to transport soulders and horss from Chottagam to Arraccan (they
beinge in warrs wᵗʰ that Kinge), he would give us his Pharwanna[c] of
a settlemᵗ of trade, wᵗʰ prevaledges as formerly accordinge to the 12
articles formerly sent hime from our agent &c. Capt. Heath, in the
letter sent, condesended to the Nabob’s request, in suplyinge hime wᵗʰ
10 ships and vessells for the Mogull’s occations, to transport ther
soulders and horss, provided they would allow of the buildinge of a
fortyfiction wᵗʰin the river of Hugly, for the better security of the
Rᵗ Honᵇˡᵉ Compˢ estate and serᵗˢ; wᵗʰout wᶜʰ grant of a fortyfied place
the Compˢ ordʳˢ possitive are, to wᵗʰdraw off all our factory from this
place.

We continued heere 5 weeks for the Nabob’s answer to the proposall:
but not comeing, we, haveinge taken off all the Honᵇˡᵉ Compˢ concernes
from the shoare, saild from Chuttynᵗʸ the 8ᵗʰ 9ber, and passed by ther
fortts peaceably. At our arrival Balasore found that the govenʳ of the
towne had (some tyme before our comeinge) detaind the Rᵗ Honᵇˡᵉ Compˢ
goods, beinge this yeares investmᵗˢ, alsoe partic. mens goods; and
would not permit none of the factors, nor our people that were ashoure
buying provit[ions], to come off. Capᵗ Heath sent 2 of our factors wᵗʰ
a letter to the govenʳ (who was come downe to the bancksall, or point
of sand goeinge into the river, wher he was makeinge a fortyfication),
to demand the Rᵗ Honbᵉ Compˢ goods wᵗʰ all our men. His answer was,
what he did was by order from the Nabob; and, if he did dilliver our
goods and men, should loose his head. 3 days after, 2 of the factors
were againe sent to aquaint the govenʳ that our intention was to depart
out these parts peaceable, we haveinge come away out Hugly river wᵗʰout
doeinge any act of hostillity to any of the Mogull’s subjects; therfore
requird hime to send off our goods and people by faire meanes; if not,
we would have them by force of armes. Wᶜʰ hee not permitting them too
goe off, the next day all our soulders, about 320, and upwards 240
seamen were put into the small vessels and all our boates; and early
next morninge they landed a mile to the W.ward of the fort (wᶜʰ the
govnʳ had rais’d); against wᶜʰ landinge place they had planted 5 small
guns on a sandhill, wᶜʰ they discharg’d at our men, and killd 2 and
wounded 2 more; soe fled from the guns. And soone after, the cheife
capᵗ of our soulders had drawne all the soulders and seamen in order of
battalia, marcht up to the fort, wᶜʰ, at ther aproach, fired all ther
guns they had planted to the land; but, soone after, the govenʳ and
all his men fleed out the fort wᵗʰout doeing much harme to our men; the
wᶜʰ we possest wᵗʰout any farther opposition. In and about this fort
they had upwards 40 guns mounted and a good wall made wᵗʰ timber and
clay; might have bine sufficient (if manag’d by Europeans) to [have]
wᵗʰstood a great armie of men, or at least done much more mischief then
they did.

The govenʳ, after deserted his fort, made all hast possable up to
Balasore towne, and orderd the factory house (in wᶜʰ were confind all
our people, thirteene in number) to be sett on fire. Our people in
the house defended themselves bravely, killinge sevˡ of the Moors;
but by the firsness of the fire were forct to surrender themselves on
tearmes to have ther lives and good useage. The next day Capt. Heath
(who went ashoare wᵗʰ the soulders--Capᵗ Sharpe comanded the small
vessells and boates that were to goe over the barr, leaveinge mee in
comand of the ships in the roade) went up with all the soulders and
seamen to Balasore towne by watter and landed short of old Balasore
fort, the wᶜʰ they soone tooke; soe marcht into the towne, few or noe
people beinge left to oppose them; the govenʳ disertinge it at ther
comeinge, caryinge wᵗʰ hime all our English, amongst wᶜʰ are 3 of our
ships compᵃ, vizᵗ. Mr. Davenant (beinge ashoare buyinge provit[ions]),
Charles Scarlet, midshipman, and Sam Harbin, gunʳ, serᵗ of Capⁿ
Heath’s, his pursur, and 3 more, Mr. Stanly, cheife of the factory,
the rest free men that trades in the country. As yet we cannot gett
the govenʳ to give ther releasemᵗ. We have sent sevˡ messingers to
hime, that we have not burnt ther towne nor ships, expectinge he would
dilliver up our men; but, if not, we will returne and doe both. Our
soulders (but seamen more espetially) have comitted many inhuemane
actions in the towne, plundringe not only Moors but sevˡ Portugeese
houses, and killed sevˡ innocent people. We have had the greatest loss
in this axtion, vizᵗ. 4 men killd and 3 wounded. Ther names are: Mr.
Starland, 3d mate, Henry Grove, cheife trumpetter, Christopher Hogg,
and Jnᵒ Hinton, who very indiscreetly went out wᵗʰ sevˡ more seamen to
a garden house, expectinge great plunder, were cut off, sevˡ of them,
by a party of horss. The 3 wounded are Henʳʸ Roxby, Franˢ Johnson, and
Jnᵒ Smart.

I have, by the Williamson (by whom this is alsoe intended you), sent
Sʳ Henʳʸ Johnson and Sʳ Tho. Rawlinson, and alsoe to my wife, a list
of our dead &cᵃ men, in all 44. Our supernumery men wᶜʰ I brought out
of England, beinge 27, at my arivall Madras, I aquaintd the President
therwᵗʰ, who offred them to Cap. Bromwell, the Rotchester haveinge lost
most of ther men. But he refuseinge to pay the charge the Honᵇˡᵉ Compᵃ
were at sendinge them out, they were not taken out ther; and what of
them that are alive doe still remaine in our ship, not beinge demanded
here by the agent. I supose our owners will be alowed for them at 50ˢ
per mᵒ, noe longer then our departure Madras, to wᶜʰ tyme we had lost
30 men. I doe not repent ther continueinge abord, haveinge had soe
great mortolaty and most of them the best of our seamen.

I supose our next enterprize will be towards Chottagam, a place neere
the coast of Arraccan. The Rᵗ Honᵇˡᵉ Compᵃ possative orders are for
endeavouringe the takinge it; but I feare we shall not have strength
sufficient to effect it, the Nabob haveinge sent many thousand of [men]
this yeare ther to over run and take the kingdome of Arracan. The king
of that country beinge some tyme since dead, part of the people are in
rebelion against the present govermᵗ; by whᶜʰ its supos’d the Mogullers
will goe farr in takeing that country this yeare, and we frustrated of
our designe.

Honᵇˡᵉ Sir, I have not writt to any of owners (except the 2 in charty
party), beleivinge we shall returne to Madras before the Williamson
sailes for England. Our ship is in a very good condition and very
thite. I beleive our stay in India will be the extreme of our tyme, for
at present noe prospect of a freight for Europe; and I feare the brave
trade of Bengall will be lost, at whᶜʰ the Dutch and French rejoyce,
that this trade may wholy fall to them.

I have not elce to add; only please to present my duty, respects, and
love to all our deere relations and freinds. Thus, wᵗʰ my due respects
to yoʳ selfe and my good lady sister, doe remaine,

Honᵇˡᵉ Sʳ, yoʳ affectionate bro. and Serᵗ, whilst

                                                           JOˢ HADDOCK.

Sʳ I recᵈ yoʳ letter, alsoe one from my wife sent per the Defence; and
returne my humble thancks for it.

    For the Honᵇˡᵉ Sʳ Richᵈ Haddock, at his house on Tower Hill.
    Present. London.

    Pʳ the Williamson, Capt. Ashby, Comandʳ, D.G.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Chuttanuttee, now Calcutta.

[b] Early in 1686 the Company fitted out an expedition to retaliate
on the Nawab of Bengal for past injuries, and to attempt to seize
Chittagong. But before the arrival of the forces a premature quarrel
with the natives forced the English to abandon Hoogly and retire to
Chuttanuttee. In Sept. 1687, a truce was patched up, but the Company
was not satisfied. An armament was despatched under command of Heath.
The result was the attack on Balasore, as told in this letter, an
abortive attempt on Chittagong, and the abandonment of the Company’s
factories in Bengal.--See Mill’s _Hist. of British India_, book i.
chap. v.

[c] Farwana, the licence granted by a viceroy; as distinguished from a
firman, granted by a sovereign.




RICHARD HADDOCK[a] TO HIS FATHER, SIR RICHARD HADDOCK.

                      Aprill[b] yᵉ 23ᵈ [1692]; Munday, in yᵉ Hooke.[c]

HONOURD Sʳ,

This is to acquaint of our ingaging wᵗʰ yᵉ French and of our haveing
gott yᵉ victory. Wee mett yᵐ of sea, May 19. There was about 60 saile.
Wee fought yᵐ from 11 to 9 att night; since wᶜʰ, have been in pursuit
of yᵐ. There is run ashoare, in Sherbrook bay, Torveil[d] wᵗʰ 3 more
capitall ships, wᶜʰ are now burned. Cozen Tom Heath[e] burnt Torveil;
and have chased 14 saile more in yᵉ Hooke, where wee now are. Sʳ
Cloudsly Shovel is goeing in wᵗʰ yᵉ 3ᵈ rates and fire-ships to destroy
yᵐ. Wee have been soe unfortunate as [to] lose Rear Admˡˡ Carter[f]
in yᵉ fight. I am very well and have received no wound; only a small
splinter hitt mee on yᵉ thigh, but did no damage, only made itt black
and blew. I would write more particularly, but yᵉ vessell I heare is
goeing away presently; soe, haveing no more att present, butt duty to
your self and my mother,

I remain your dutyfull Son,

                                                        RICHᵈ HADDOCK.

Cozen Ruffin is alive and very well. I will write yᵉ particulars of our
fight as soon as wee come into any port.

                                                                 Rᵈ H.

    For Sʳ Richᵈ Haddock, att yᵉ Navy Office, in Crutched Fryers,
    London.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Afterwards Comptroller of the Navy. See Preface.

[b] A slip of the pen for _May_.

[c] “The Hooke” and “Sherbrook,” nautical English for La Hogue and
Cherbourg.

[d] Tourville fought in the great three-decker “Royal Sun,” the largest
vessel afloat.

[e] Afterwards captain of the Chester. Died in the West Indies in 1693.

[f] “Carter was the first who broke the French line. He was struck
by a splinter of one of his own yard-arms, and fell dying on the
deck. He would not let go his sword. ‘Fight the ship,’ were his last
words; ‘fight the ship as long as she can swim.’”--Macaulay, _Hist. of
England_, chap. xviii.




ISABELLA CHICHELEY[a] TO SIR RICHARD HADDOCK.

                                  Wedensday night, the 4 July, [16]94.

Your good nature, Sʳ, hath drawne upon you the gossupin of a company
of women. My sisters desire we may drinke our punch with you to-morrow
in the evening, about six aclocke, if it is not inconvenient to you.
I should have sent to you to day, but was prevented. However, Sʳ, it
may yett be ajorned for longer time, if you are othere wise disposed.
The docters are sending me to Tunbridge ere long, soe that a warm
foundation before drinking those cold waters will not [be] amisse for,
Sʳ,

Your oblidged, humble servant,

                                                   ISABELLA CHICHELEY.

    For Sʳ Rich. Haddocke, These.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Probably related to Admiral Sir John Chicheley.




SIR RICHARD HADDOCK TO HIS SON RICHARD.

                                     Navy Office, this 27th Novʳ, 1702.

DEARE SON,

I have yoʳˢ of yesterday’s date, from the Downes, wᶜʰ brings us the
joyfull tydeings of yoʳ safe arrivall there. Yoʳ long passage from
Newfoundland put us in great feare of your wellfare, and perticularly
your moʳ hath bine for a month or 5 weekes crying for you and yoʳ
brother Nicˢ safety; but blessed be God you are both come well home.
Your broʳ now with us came up from the Downes by leave from his Captⁿ,
and hath behaved himself with so much bravery and couradge that he hath
gained the good report of the Duke of Ormond, his Captⁿ, &c., both in
the action at Rotta and St. Mary Port,[a] and Vigo, and was the first
man that borded one of the gallions at Vigo,[b] wᶜʰ is come home. I do
not find by yoʳ letter that you were wᵗʰ your Comodore at the takeing
and destroying the French shipps to the southwards of Trepassa,[c] and
consequently you will not come in for your share of that capture. The
news papers tells us yoʳ prize is got into Plymᵒ, and for your boate
wᵗʰ 5 men you say you left behind at Plymᵒ we never heard anything of
it, wᶜʰ gives you trouble; and because you write not of my Coz Wᵐ’ˢ[d]
wellfare, I am conscernd for feare he might be in that boate. To morrow
morning I intend to go to yᵉ Admᵗʸ and endeavor you may come into the
River, if his R. Highness orders your cleaneing.

God Allmighty hath blest yᵉ forces of her Majᵗʸ and her Allies, both
by land and sea, in a wonderfull manner; for wᶜʰ we lately had a
publick day of thanksgiveing in this citty. The Queene, House of Lords
and Comons, wᵗʰ the Bishops, Judges, &c. came to Sᵗ Paul’s Church,
where, after sermon, Te Deum was sung.

Since your leaveing England, two of our bord are dead, vizᵗ. Mr.
Sotherne and my good freind Comʳ Willshaw,[e] who dyed yᵉ 23ᵈ Sepʳ
last. My Coz Anna Babb, that was in one of our almes houses at Stepny,
is likewise dead, and my poore Cozⁿ Lockwood’s son in law, Cozⁿ
Hodges, dyed lately at Gosport, since his arrivall from Cadix and
Vigo, who waited a tender on yᵉ Duke of Ormond’s shipp. We are all in
good health, praised be God, and do kindly salut you. I am your most
afectionᵗ father,

                                                            Rᵈ HADDOCK.

Pray let me know how yoʳ shipp proves. I have concernd my selfe to get
one of yᵉ 4ᵗʰ rates building at Deptford for you, and this day spake
to Sʳ Geo. Rooke about it, and formerly to yᵉ other 3 Councill of yᵉ
Lord High Admˡˡ. I know she is tender by your reifeing your courses;
and twas well hinted in yours to yᵉ Admᵗʸ. I am glad you past by Plymᵒ.
Orders went thither some tyme since to cleane you and severall of yoʳ
consarts.

                                                                 Rᵈ H.

    On Her Majesty’s Service. To Captⁿ Richard Haddock, Comandʳ of
    her Majᵗʸ Shipp the Reserve, these present, In yᵉ Downes.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] In the expedition against Cadiz, the Duke of Ormond effected a
landing at Rota at the north end of the Bay of Cadiz, on the 15th
August, and occupied Puerto de Santa Maria, on the east of the Bay, six
days afterwards.

[b] The attack on the shipping in Vigo took place on the 12th October.

[c] Trepassey, in Newfoundland.

[d] This is probably the William Haddock noticed by Charnock,
_Biographia Navalis_, iv. 44, who died in 1726. He may have been the
son of Richard Haddock, Sir Richard’s uncle.

[e] Thomas Willshaw, Commissioner of the Navy and Master of the Trinity
House.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                                    Navy Office, this 10ᵗʰ Decembʳ, 1703.

MY DEARE SON,

Your letter of the 17ᵗʰ Novʳ past, giveing me accᵗ of the unhapy
disaster of your ship being run ashore by a Dutch pilot and of your
happy getting off againe, I recᵈ 3 or 4 ds. after its date; but,
hopeing you might have gote away before an answer could arrive you,
I forbore answering it to you to Helvoet Sluce. I have just now recᵈ
yours of the 7ᵗʰ instant, Tuesday, and, to our great joy, the accᵗ
of God Almighty’s wonderfull preservation of you in the late most
dreadfull storm,[a] wᶜʰ no man liveing can remember the like. I
perseave you have had an accᵗ of the most sad and lamentable efects of
it heere in England, not only in the losse of our shipp[ing], but about
1500 men in the Queen’s shipps. I shall not eneumerate yᵉ perticulars
of the losse, only that Capt. Emes,[b] wᵗʰ his wife and son and all yᵉ
men in yᵉ Restauration, lost on yᵉ Goodwin, and poore Tom Blake drowned
at Bristoll in yᵉ Canterbury store ship cast away. The Dorcetshire we
have accᵗ of her being on yᵉ back of Yarmᵒ Sands, cruseing, I supose
for want of anchors and cables, and hope yᵉ Association is cruseing
in the sea on the like occasion. My deare son Nicᵒ hapend to be sick
on bord her, as Sʳ S. Fairebone[c] wrote me from the Downes. I sent
Tom Apleby imediatly to Deale to bring him up; but the ship sailed yᵉ
morning before he gote downe. I hope he will come well home to us. Pray
God the Russell may be got of yᵉ sands and into Helvoet Sluce.

Wee haue 7 or 8 vessells wᵗʰ anchors and cables in Harwᶜʰ or Oasely
bay, ready to put to sea when we heare where Sʳ Stafford is. Sʳ Cloud.
Shovell I hope now safe at the Nore; his mainemast cut downe after he
had drove 3 leagˢ from yᵉ Longsᵈ, very neare the Galloper. Yᵉ Sᵗ Geo.
and R. Oake, now at Blackstakes, rode out yᵉ storme wᵗʰout damage; and
the Cambridge I beleive the same. The 4 ships that broke from their
ground takle was the Association, Russell, Revenge, and Dorcetshire.
The Revenge was in Solebay some tyme since, and furnish wᵗʰ anchors and
cables from yᵉ Nottingham and another man of warr yᵗ went out Yarmᵒ
roads to looke for our shipps. Capt. Kerr[d] in yᵉ Revenge gave accᵗ
that he saw yᵉ Association, Monday last was sevenight; so that we are
in hope she is very well. I shall not inlarge, only to give you our
kind saluts. Pray God send you wᵗʰ yᵉ King of Spaine well out that
place and over to us. My harty and humble service to Sʳ Geo: Rooke.

I am your most afecᵗ father,

                                                                 R. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] On the 26th November.

[b] Fleetwood Emms.

[c] Sir Stafford Fairborne, Vice-Admiral of the Red.

[d] William Kerr. Dismissed the service, in 1708, for joining in a
contraband trade with the enemy.




CAPTAIN EDWARD WHITAKER[a] TO SIR RICHARD HADDOCK.

                            Dated on board her Majᵗⁱᵉˢ ship Dorsetshire,
                                  in Gibralter Bay, July yᵉ 29ᵗʰ [1704].

Sʳ,

I heare give you an accoᵗ of our good success, especially what has
related to my own particular part. July 21ˢᵗ we anchor’d here in yᵉ
Bay, and about 4 in the afternoon landed about 2000 marrines, Dutch and
all. I commanded yᵉ landing with three captaines more; all which was
don wᵗʰ little opposition. About 40 horse came downe from yᵉ towne,
wᶜʰ was all; and they run away soe soon as our guns began to play upon
them. We landed about 2 miles from the towne, in yᵉ Bay, and march’d
directly to the foot of the hill, were they posted themselves within
muskett shott of the gates; so cutt of all manner of communication
from yᵉ land. We hove into yᵉ towne this evening about 17 shells. The
Prince of Hess[b] landed with us and immediatly sent a summons to the
Governer, wᶜʰ did not returne any answer tell the next morning, and
then the Governer said he would defend the towne to the very last. Then
Admirall Byng, who commanded the cannonading, began to draw up all his
ships in a line before the towne; but, it proving little wind, could
not gett in with them all, so that we did little this day. There was
three small ships in the old mold, one of which annoy’d our camp by
fireing amongst them, having about 10 guns lying close in the mold and
just under a great bastion at yᵉ north corner of the towne. I proposed
to Sʳ George[c] the burning her in the night. He liked itt; accordingly
ordered what boats I would have to my assistance; and about 12 at night
I did it effectually, wᵗʰ the loss of but one man and 5 or 6 wounded.

July 23rd. At 4 this morning, Admˡ Byng began with his ships to
cannonade, a Dutch Rear Admˡ with 5 or 6 ships of theirs along with
him; which made a noble noise, being within half shot of the towne.
My ship not being upon service, I desired Sʳ George to make me his
aducon to carry his comands from tyme to tyme to admirall Byng, which
he did accordingly; and after about 2 hours continuall fireing sent
me with orders to forbare. Upon this I went to every ship in the line
wᵗʰ this orders, and coming on board Capt. Jumper,[d] in yᵉ Lenox,
found him extraordinary well posted within muskett shott of the new
mold head, and had beat them all out of yᵉ battery and of the mold, so
that I beleived we might attack it with our boats. I went immediatly
and acquainted Admˡ Byng wᵗʰ it, who ordered all the boats to be man’d
and arm’d. From him I went to Sʳ George and gave him my oppinion that
the mold might be attack’d. He immediatly made the signall for all the
boates in yᵉ fleet, and gave me the command of yᵉ attack, wᵗʰ 3 or 4
captaines along wᵗʰ me. I made all the hast I could with orders to
Admirall Byng to send me accordingly; but some of the boats got ashore
before I could reach them, wᵗʰ little or no opposition. Severall of our
men gott into yᵉ Castle; upon which it blew up. We had kill’d between
40 and 50 men. Most of all the boates that landed first were sunk;
about 100 or two wounded; upon which, all yᵗ remain’d came running
downe and leap’d into the water, being so mightyly surprized. I landed
within a minute after the accident, and rallied our men. We went over
a breach in the wall but one at a time, and took possesstion of the
hill. I immediatly sent Capt. Roffy[e] and Capt. Acton,[f] wᵗʰ between
40 and 50 men, and took possesstion of a bastion of 8 guns within less
then half muskett shott of the towne wall: and there we pitch’d our
collours. Soon after, Admˡ Byng came ashore to me and sent in a drumer
wᵗʰ a sommons, who returnd in about 2 hours wᵗʰ a letter in answer that
they would surrender the next day; wᶜʰ they accordingly did. I beleive
I had wᵗʰ me, at the first onsett, between 2 and 300 men; but we grew
in a very little time to neare 1000. This was the manner we took
Gibralter, which I hope we shall maintaine.

I hope, Sʳ, youle excuse this trouble I give, butt, beleiving that
every boddy here rights att this tyme uppon this occation, I could not
forbeare giveing my very good friend Sʳ Ricᵈ this perticuler accᵗᵗ of
yᵉ whole matter; which I dont doubt butt Capt. Haddock will give yᵉ
much yᵉ same accoᵗᵗ. Pray please to favour my spouse with a line or
two, feareing mine should miscarry. My most humble servis to my good
lady and all yʳ good family. I beg youle make use of this as farre as
you shall think fitt, itt being a trew accoᵗᵗ of yᵉ whole matter.

I am

Yʳ most harty humble Serᵗ and kinsman to serve, whilst

                                                       EDWᵈ WHITAKER.

P.S. This is rite all in a hurry, so yᵗ I hope youle excuse me.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Afterwards knighted and Rear-Admiral. This letter has been printed
by Charnock in his _Biographia Navalis_; but it is worth re-printing.

[b] George, Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt.

[c] Rooke.

[d] Afterwards Sir William Jumper, Commissioner of the Navy.

[e] Kerril or Kerrit Roffey.

[f] Edward Acton, killed in action in 1706.




NICHOLAS HADDOCK[a] TO HIS FATHER SIR RICHARD HADDOCK.

              Sᵗ George in Barcelona Road, this 1ˢᵗ of May, 1706, O.S.

HONᵈ Sʳ,

This comes to you by the Faulcon pink, which is sent home express wᵗʰ
the good news of our releiving Barcelona in the greatest extremity.
The French had made preparations for a generall assault that very day
we came; and it must have been infallibly taken, had we not had the
luckiest passage imaginable (being but five days from Lisbon to Cape
Martin, where we joynd Sʳ Jno. Leake).

Saturday last in the morning, when were about 5 leagues to the wᵗward
of Barcelona, my Lord Peterborow came of to the fleet wᵗʰ twelve hundᵈ
soldiers embarqued in felucas and boats, and in the afternoon got in
and landed them, wᵗʰ all the soldiers out of the transports and most
of the marines of the fleet. We have now about nine thousand soldiers
in the towne. The French army consisted at first of twenty thousand;
four of wᶜʰ, horse under the command of the Duke of Anjou.[b] Their
loss during this seige is computed to be five [thousand] including a
thousand sick and wounded they have left behind, when they raised the
seige, wᶜʰ was at twelve aclock last night. They have left 50 peices of
brass cannon mounted and 15 mortars, and are now bound to Roussilion.
They will find great difficultys on their march. The Miquelets,[c]
being very numerous and all in arms, will destroy a great many of ’em
before they get out of Catalonia, it being a close country. The French
squadron before this place consisted of 26 saile, line of battle ships.
They sailed the night before we came, having intelligence of us by
their scouts. They were all the supply the army had for provisions,
for the Catalans have not given them the least; nor could a man of ’em
stirr from his tent a musquet shot out of the Camp but they killed him.
We are now sending four ships with 6 hundred soldiers for Girone, to
reinforce that garrison, lest the French should make any attempt on it,
it lying in their way.

I hear there is an express come to Barcelona from my Lord Gallaway,
giving an account of his being got to Toledo and on his march for
Madrid. The lucky turn Providence has given to our affairs in these
parts I suppose will be joyfull news in England; and this being the
first certain accᵗ you’l have, this long letter wont seem tedious.

I can expect no letters from you till Sʳ Clowdsly joyne us, and then
do hope shall hear of your welfare and some good news in return of
all this, which, with my duty to yʳ self and mother and love to all
friends, is from,

Honᵈ Sir,

Yʳ dutifull Son,

                                                         Nˢ HADDOCK.

P.S.--We have had an eclipse of the sun to-day; lasted above two hours,
and for a quarter ’twas total and as dark as night. Wᵗ it may portend,
I leave to the learned. Our fleet consists of 50 saile in the line; 13
of wᶜʰ, Dutch.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Afterwards Admiral.

[b] Philip V. of Spain.

[c] Irregulars of the militia of Catalonia.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                                      Alicant, this 31ˢᵗ of July, 1706.

HONᵈ Sʳ,

I have both yʳ letters by Captⁿ Delevall,[a] as also the butter and
cheeses, for wᶜʰ I returne you thanks. I’m glad to hear both my
sisters are so well recovered by the Bath. Pray God continue their
healths. Sunday last we took this place, attacking it by land and
sea; and almost all the people of it are run up to the castle, wᵗʰ
the garrison, for protection. We assisted our army with 500 seamen. I
have been ashore with 50 of our ship’s company during the seige; am
very heartily fateigued, but very well in health. After we have got
the castle, I hear the fleet will go for the Islands of Minorca and
Majorca, and, after that, I hope home. If the Sᵗ George should not do,
intend asking Sʳ Jnᵒ Leake leave for my self.

I’m glad to hear the ship at Sheernes will be launcht so soon as March.
I hope I’m pretty secure of her. I desire your excuse for this bad
scrawle and blotted paper, but I write wᵗʰ a pen made wᵗʰ an old razor
that I find in the house I’m quartered in. I have no more to say but my
duty to yʳ self and mother and love to all freinds in London and Mile
end, and remaine,

Honᵈ Sʳ,

Yʳ dutifull Son,

                                                           N. HADDOCK.

P.S.--This lettʳ goes by the Rye.

    To Sʳ Richᵈ Haddock, at the Navy Office in Crutched Fryars,
    London, these.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] George Delaval, of the Tilbury.




SIR RICHARD HADDOCK TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE ADMIRALTY.

                                                       25ᵗʰ July, 1709.

GENTLEMEN,

In the yeare 1672 I comanded as Captⁿ of the Royall James, under the Rᵗ
Honᵇˡᵉ the Earle of Sandwᶜʰ, in the Sowle Bay fight. The said shipp,
after a vigorous defence, was burnt by the Dutch; in wᶜʰ action I was
wounded, the cure of wᶜʰ cost me, in surgeons, apothicary, nurses, &c.,
betwext fower score and a hundred pounds. I have bine so remise and
negligent as not to demaund satisfaction for my reimbursemᵗ. Do pray
the favor of the bord I may have a bill made out, what you shall think
convenient, haveing bine out of my mony now 36 ys. I likewise, in the
yeare 1690 (being then one of the Comʳˢ for Victualling), was taken
into custody at Portsmᵒ, and brought up a prisoner from thence by
order of the then House of Comons, and remained as such a considerable
tyme in yᵉ hands of Mr. Topham, then sergant at armes to sᵈ house,
under pretence of our poisoning the fleet then at sea (under comᵈ of
Admˡˡ Herbert, now Earle of Torrington), with gutts in our beere and
gaules in our beefe;[a] and with great dificulty obtained to be bailed.
I must not call it injustice in that august assembly, what they did
to me; but it cost me about a hundred pounds to Mr. Topham for his
fees, and to lawyers soliciting the House of Comons, wᵗʰ expences of
entertainment whilst in custody; for satisfaction of wᶜʰ I presume
the bord will not think fitt to allow me, except directed soe to doe
by order of the Lord High Admˡˡ, for wᶜʰ shall make my aplication to
him; but for my cure, I doubt not the favor and justice of the bord in
ordering a bill to be made out.

I remain, Gentⁿ, yoʳ very humble servᵗ,

                                                          Rᵈ. HADDOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] Macaulay’s “casks of meat which dogs would not touch, and barrels
of beer which smelt worse than bilge water.”--_Hist. of England_, ch.
xiv.




SIR RICHARD HADDOCK TO HIS GRANDSON.[a]

                                    Clapham, 28ᵗʰ May, 1712, Wedensday.

DEARE GRANDSON,

I came yesterday to this place, and, according to my promise, do answer
yours of 18ᵗʰ instant from Christ Colledge in Oxford.

It happens to be this day 40 years that I was burnt out of the Royall
James in the Sole Bay fight against the Dutch. Am well pleased to find
the efforts you intend to make yourselfe famous in Westminster Hall.
It is like the saying of your Unckle Nichˢ, who doubted not but to be
as great as Sʳ Cloudesly Shovell was; and he pushes very faire for
it. Your father and family went to Wakehurst Satuarday last; tooke
Betty and Fanny Clark[b] downe wᵗʰ them; gote well thither. Yoʳ Unckle
Richard, the weeke past, hath bine very ill wᵗʰ a feavor and ague,
wᶜʰ kept me from hence longer then I designed; is under the advice of
Doctor Ratclif,[c] who gave me leave to come downe hither, promiseing
his care of him; and was downe staires when came away.

With my harty prayers for yoʳ health and wellfare, I am

Yoʳ most afecᵗ grandfather,

                                                              Rᵈ. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] This must be a son of Sir Richard’s daughter, who married a Mr.
Lydell.

[b] Children of another of Sir Richard’s daughters, who married John
Clarke, of Blake Hall, in Bobbingworth, co. Essex.

[c] No doubt Dr. John Radcliffe.




CAPTAIN NICHOLAS HADDOCK TO HIS WIFE.

                    Grafton at sea, about 10 leagues from Cape Passaro,
                                                    Aug. the 4ᵗʰ, 1718.

MY Dʳ FANNY,

The Superbe being orderd from the fleet wᵗʰ the Admirall’s letters, I
send this to tell you I am well.

Five days ago we had a battle wᵗʰ the Spanish fleet off of Cape
Passaro,[a] on the Island of Sicily, in wᶜʰ severall of their ships
were taken and some destroyd. The Grafton had her share in that action,
and the Admirall has been pleased to make me great compliments on my
behaviour that day. I shall soon be orderd to be refitted at Port
Mahon, the ship requiring it. I had fifty men killd and wounded. Among
the former was Lᵗ Bramble, who was appointed by the intrest of Sir
Cha. Wager. I’m sorry for him, he being a good officer. My Cousin
Haddock[b] chased towards the shoar after part of the Spanish fleet,
when they separated, wᵗʰ 4 or 5 other ships whose signalls were made
for that purpose, and they are not yet come into the fleet. However, I
doubt not but he is well, the ships that they were sent after being of
the smaller sort.

My dʳ, pray send to Mrs. Harris to tell her her spouse is well.[c]
He dined aboard me the day after the action; he was one of the ships
engaged.

Just before we saild from Naples I received yʳ letter, and am glad to
hear yʳself and the little boy are well. I give my love to all freinds,
and remaine, my dʳ Fanny,

Yʳ most affecᵗ husband,

                                                           Nˢ. HADDOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] On the 31st July, when Sir George Byng almost destroyed the Spanish
fleet.

[b] Probably William Haddock. See above, p. 43, note d.

[c] Captain Barrow Harris, of the Breda.




THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                      Grafton, at Regio, Janʳʸ the 19ᵗʰ, O.S., 1718/9.

MY DEAR SPOUSE,

I send this to tell you I am well. I believe, before this come to you,
you will have heard of my having forced ashoar on Sicily a Spanish man
of war of 70 guns, wᶜʰ is overset and sunk. I recᵈ some shot from her,
but without much damage. My dʳ, we are here at an anchor, in company
wᵗʰ the Kent, Royˡ Oake, and Rochester, to block up Camock,[a] who is
at Messina and will not venture out, his squadron being much inferiour
to us. By the news we receive from England, I conjecture Spain will
soon be oblidgd to accept the terms proposed to ’em; after wᶜʰ I
suppose the bigger ships will be orderd home, where I shall always be
glad to be, whenever it consists wᵗʰ my honour; for, indeed, my dear
Fanny, I heartily love you.

Pray give my love to all freinds, and I remaine, my dʳ,

Yʳ most affect. husband,

                                                          Nˢ. HADDOCK.

P.S. This goes for Naples wᵗʰ an express that Capt. Mathews[b] sends to
the Admˡ, and from thence it will be forwarded to you.

                                                                Nˢ. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

[a] George Cammock, the Spanish Rear-Admiral, who had taken refuge
in Messina. He slipped out in a frigate, which however he had to
abandon, and escaped by boat to land. He was an Irishman who had
served with distinction in the English navy under Queen Anne, but had
been dismissed on account of his Jacobite tendencies. He then entered
the Spanish service; and it is said that, if the Spanish Admiral had
followed his advice, the battle off Cape Passaro might have had a
different result.

[b] Thomas Mathews, afterwards Admiral, who commanded the blockading
force.




INDEX.


  Acton, Edward, Captain:
    at the capture of Gibraltar, 48

  Aumont, Antoine d’, Marshal:
    attempt on Ostend, 5, 6


  Babb, Anna: 44

  Balasore:
    attacked by the English, 37-39

  Barcelona:
    relief of, 49

  Blake, Robert, Admiral:
    his last victory, 3

  Blake, Thomas: 45

  Bramble, Lieutenant: 53

  Brandon, William:
    letter, 35

  Bristol, George Digby, Earl of: 13

  Burstow, William, Captain: 15

  Byng, Sir George, Admiral:
    at the capture of Gibraltar, 46-48


  Cammock, George, Spanish admiral: 54

  Carter, Richard, Admiral:
    killed at La Hogue, 42

  Charles II. of England:
    visits the fleet, 23, 24, 29

  Chicheley, Isabella:
    letter, 42

  Clarke, Elizabeth: 53

  Clarke, Fanny: 53

  Courtney, Francis, Captain: 21

  Coventry, Sir William: 7

  Cromwell, Oliver, Lord Protector: 2


  Davenant, ----: 39

  Deane, Anthony, Navy Commissioner: 21

  Delaval, George, Captain: 50


  Emms, Fleetwood, Captain: 45

  Estrees, Jean d’, Comte, Admiral: 23, 24


  Fairborne, Sir Stafford, Admiral: 45

  Finch, William, Captain: 20

  Foules, Thomas, Captain: 20

  Frowd, Philip, Postmaster: 36


  Galway, Henry de Massue de Ruvigny, Earl of: 50

  Gibraltar:
    its capture, 46-48

  Goodlad, ----: 10, 11, 12, 14

  Grove, Henry: 39


  Haddock, Andrew: 2

  Haddock, Elizabeth:
    letters to, 10, 12, 14, 19, 21

  Haddock, Fanny or Frances:
    letters to, 53, 54

  Haddock, Joseph, Captain: 11, 19, 21;
    letter from India, 37;
    at attack on Balasore, 37-39

  Haddock, Lydia: 3

  Haddock, Nicholas, Captain:
    at Vigo, 43, 45;
    letters, 49, 50, 53, 54;
    at Barcelona, 49;
    at Cape Passaro, 53;
    at Messina, 54

  Haddock, Richard: 4, 13, 21;
    his gallantry, 19

  Haddock, Sir Richard, Admiral:
    letters, 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 14, 19, 21, 36, 43, 44, 51, 52;
    with squadron off Dunkirk, 3-7;
    declaration on the Dutch striking their flag, 9;
    serves against the Dutch, 10-31;
    account of the battle of Southwold Bay, 16-19;
    wounded, 18;
    journal, 22-31;
    observations on naval engagements, 31-35;
    reported desertion, 35, 36;
    claim for compensation, 51, 52

  Haddock, Richard, Captain: 43, 44, 53;
    letter on the battle of La Hogue, 41-42

  Haddock, William, Captain: letters to, 1, 3, 5, 6

  Haddock, William: 3, 5, 43;
    at battle of Cape Passaro, 54

  Hambliton [Hamilton?] Colonel: 22

  Harbin, Samuel: 39

  Harbord, Sir Charles, 18

  Harman, Sir John, Admiral: 21, 30

  Harris, Barrow, Captain: 54

  Hayward, John, Captain: 21

  Heath, Captain:
    attacks Balasore, 37-39

  Heath, Thomas:
    gallantry at La Hogue, 41

  Hesse-Darmstadt, George, Prince of:
    at the capture of Gibraltar, 46

  Hinton, John: 39

  Hodges, Captain: 44

  Hogg, Christopher: 39

  Hogue, La:
    battle of, 41-42


  Johnson, Francis: 40

  Jordan, Sir Joseph, Admiral:
    his conduct at Southwold Bay, 17, 18

  Jumper, William, Captain:
    at the capture of Gibraltar, 47


  Kelsey, Thomas, Major-General: 1

  Kerr, William, Captain: 45


  Lane, Samuel: 15

  Lydell, ----: 52


  Mathews, Thomas, Captain: 55

  Mayo, Thomas, Lieutenant: 18


  Ossory, Thomas Butler, Earl of: 24

  Ostend:
    attempt on, 5, 6


  Passaro, Cape: battle of, 53

  Pennyman, Captain: 35

  Peterborough, Charles Mordaunt, Earl of:
    relieves Barcelona, 49

  Philip V. of Spain: 49

  Poole, Sir William, Captain: 14, 15, 16


  Roffey, Kerril, Captain: 48

  Rooke, Sir George, Admiral: 44, 45;
    at the capture of Gibraltar, 47

  Roxby, Henry: 40

  Rupert, Prince: 23, 24, 28, 30, 31;
    his actions with the Dutch, 19, 20, 26-28


  Sadlington, Richard, Captain: 28

  Sandwich, Edward Montague, Earl of, Admiral:
    commanding off Dunkirk, 5;
    at Southwold Bay, 16-19

  Sawkell, Edmond: 35

  Scarlet, Charles: 39

  Sharpe, Captain: 39

  Shovel, Sir Cloudesley, Admiral:
    at La Hogue, 41, 45

  Smart, John: 40

  Sotherne, ----: 44

  Southwold, or Sole, Bay:
    battle of, 16-19

  Stanier, Sir Richard, Admiral: 9

  Stanley, ----, Factor at Balasore: 39

  Starland, ----: 39

  Storm of 1703: 45

  Strickland, Sir Roger, Admiral: 22


  Tempest, John, Captain: 20

  Thanksgiving-day: 44

  Topham, ----, Serjeant-at-Arms: 52

  Trepassey, in Newfoundland:
    action off, 43

  Trevanion, Richard, Captain: 20, 21


  Wasey, ----, Captain: 19

  Werden, Robert, Captain: 20, 21

  Whitaker, Edward, Captain:
    account of the capture of Gibraltar, 46-48

  White, Richard, Captain: 28

  Willshaw, Thomas, Navy Commissioner: 44


  York, James, Duke of:
    account of battle of Southwold Bay addressed to, 16-19;
    visits the fleet, 23, 24, 29

  Young, Henry, Captain: 28





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Correspondence of the Family of
Haddock 1657-1719, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRESPONDENCE--FAMILY HADDOCK ***

***** This file should be named 53144-0.txt or 53144-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/1/4/53144/

Produced by Cindy Horton and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

